b21 here we are again hey Joe hello
Jordan
oh you doing man I'm doing great you
have the schedule that you have and the
amount of energy and enthusiasm you
maintain with the schedule is very
remarkable cuz you're not stopping
you're not slowing down I mean you've
had your foot on the gas for like two
solid years now make hay while the Sun
shines
I guess is that how you feel about it
well you know when you have an
opportunity that's completely
preposterous you're a fool to take it
for granted yeah I guess that's soul and
see ah so Tammy and I have been to a
hundred cities since January so
everywhere you know and part of what
keeps us going well first of all I have
a really good crew you know like the CAA
guys they're really good Live Nation's
been really good they make sure the
theaters are smooth and and we've had no
problems at all and then I have lots
people who are helping me with my
scheduling and Tammy travels with me and
then the the lectures themselves well I
really like doing them partly because I
do a different lecture every night and
so that keeps me sharp and it makes sure
that I'm thinking about new things all
the time and trying to formulate my
thoughts more precisely and they're all
so unbelievably positive so that's also
that's also something that makes it a
lot easier to do because you know I go
to a city and there's 1,500 to 2,000
people waiting for me there which is
like staggering in and of itself
wherever I go and they're all there
listening intently and and it's it's a
sophisticated discussion or at least as
sophisticated as I can make it and I'm
communicating directly with the audience
and all the people are there to try to
get their lives together and so the the
feeling in the in the hall is really
really positive and then I usually talk
to about 150 people afterwards and you
know they're they all of them all of
them while many of them you know they
just say hi and they're polite and we
have a photograph and all that but lots
of them have stories about how they've
been putting their lives together and
they're thrilled to death about it you
know that they're out of the hole they
were in or
they've started a new business or
they've sold a new business or they just
decided to get married or they're gonna
have some kids or they've fixed up the
relationship with their parents or they
quit drinking or and they're they're not
addicted I talked to one guy in Europe
he'd stopped he was he was addicted I
don't remember what - but it wasn't was
something that wasn't good he'd stopped
for nine months got nine of his friends
to quit - so he comes up he's just like
bouncing you know he's so damn happy
that his life is better and not only
that that he had this additional
positive effect on other people so and
it's so fun because I have these
conversations with people they're brief
but they're very personal and they're
very intense you know because they they
you think people have to trust you to
tell you that their lives weren't going
so well and then they have to trust you
even more to tell you that they're going
better now because of course what you
want when you tell someone that things
are going better is you want real
encouragement and real sense from the
person you're talking to that they're
happy for you and I'm absolutely
thrilled to hear these things like I was
in Whole Foods this morning I went down
near where I'm standing and two of the
guys that worked behind the meat counter
came out to talk to me and independently
and they both been reading my books and
watching my lectures and one of them
said he had a seven-year-old son he
really wanted to do right by him he was
looking for ethical and moral guidance
and you know he found the books really
helpful and then it was helping him put
his life together and and so car guy at
the car rental place last night told me
the same thing and so it's so exciting
it's so ridiculously exciting to go
everywhere around the world and to go
into airports or to walk down the street
and have people come up and say I've
been watching you on YouTube they often
mention you I've been listening to what
you say I've been developing the vision
for my life it's really helped me a lot
thanks a lot and Jesus like to be able
to have that happen you know time after
time day after day all over the place
that's just absolutely it makes go into
a hundred cities like continually
energizing because it's so positive and
so and then there's all this weird crap
in the press you know about my dangerous
followers and all this all right
nonsense and it's
ridiculous you know I've talked to
250,000 people in it in in seven months
we haven't had one incident that was
negative in that entire time not one
nothing
no misbehavior on anyone's part we had
one heckler who was obviously not a fan
of mine given that he was a heckler that
was it other than that the audience's
behaved perfectly they all dress up they
come in suits which is really cool a lot
of the young guys they dress up so they
have a little suit competition with me
which is quite fun so that's an
additional bonus and yeah it's it's
pretty damn good Jill I think it's
really fantastic and I think what's
going on is it makes me very optimistic
because I think that one of the things
that new media has provided as these new
avenues for information to get out there
and these new things like these lecture
circuits when was the last time you saw
public lecture circuits that were
popular to the tune of thousands and
thousands of people
I saw the ones that you and Sam Harris
did on YouTube and you know Sam's doing
them with a lot of other people as well
you're doing them with a bot off with
Dave Rubin as well
yeah these are this is a very unique
thing that's for sure and also this
desire to understand new paths of
behavior and patterns of thinking and
that these are corrective paths and
patterns that can lead you to a more
fulfilled and happier life yeah and and
recognize the pitfalls of certain types
of behavior that people just fall into
yep and I think often times the
difference between someone who lives a
fulfilled life and someone who lives a
life filled with disaster is following
in correct patterns and not knowing what
the correct ones are so there's a lot of
good people out there that live shitty
life and they don't do it because
they're they're just dumb or because
they're bad they do it because they've
been influenced by certain patterns
they've fallen into patterns whether
it's because of the people that they
surround themselves with or the the
neighborhood they grew up the the people
that around them have this way of being
and they kind of fall into that or it's
drugs or it's alcohol or whatever it is
but then they find a new one you know
and then they can slide right into that
new one and all sudden they feel
energized and they wake up in the
morning instead of hungover they're
getting exercise in their eating how
they're starting to think about things
correctly and do good things and the
momentum of them doing those good things
leads them to feel good about themselves
and energized and they say these are all
things that you promote and then I think
are genuinely really significant you
know really important well in what he
gets but the thing is it gets maligned
it gets you get pushed into this weird
and what if what we were talking about
before the podcast by a small select
group of people it's a very small but
vocal minority that wants to
misrepresent you you know and then
there's the periphery that listen to
this small group and then they sort of
parrot those words out without any real
thinking about what you've said well you
know one of the things that I have made
a mistake about in the past that I just
realized in the last couple of weeks was
that you know people often accused me
and they say well most of the people
that listen to you or men and I think
you know when you're accused like that
your automatic response is well you
wouldn't be accused if you weren't doing
something wrong so there must be
something wrong about that's like why
isn't it 50% women and so I've said
things like well you know 80 percent of
the people who watch youtube videos are
men and so the fact that 80 percent of
the people who watch my videos are men
isn't that surprising given that base
rate but then about three weeks ago I
started thinking what what the hell am i
doing it's like what is there something
wrong with talking to man it's not
actually a problem it's like I'm trying
to I'm trying to I mean I didn't set out
to do that specifically but if that's
the way it's working out and and there
is a majority of men coming to my shows
say then is that why is that
all of a sudden supposed to be a bad
thing I'm asking men to you know to be
more honest and especially in their
speech and their thinking and to be more
responsible for themselves and for their
family and for the community and to grow
up and to shoulder their burden and to
live a responsible and meaningful life
and putting those two things together
conceptually and it's like and then
there's an accusation about that as if
there's something wrong and I thought
why am I even playing into this it's
like fine I'm talking to men I'm
encouraging them and I am absolutely
thrilled like every time someone comes
up to me and that's happening I may be a
hundred times
a week or something like that and tells
me one of these stories about how they
put their life together it's like I'm
absolutely thrilled about that and so I
don't see it's just a sign of how
pathological our times have become in
some sense that there would have been
any guilt about that to begin with
because how is that not a good thing man
it's weird I think a lot of that has to
do with this concept that men are
running everything and that men have
this massive advantage there's a white
male advantage and privilege that we all
enjoy and share and that men have this
advantage financially there's disparity
in terms of the the gender gap and pay
you know an income and that if you were
really a good person you would be
looking out he would be trying to
balance that out yeah you wouldn't be
trying to pump up the winning team well
that's it that's part of that narrative
that well if there's winners there there
has to be losers and the reason that
there are losers is because there's
winners and that's complete bloody
nonsense because as far as I'm concerned
that and I really believe this is that
every single person who sets out to put
themselves together ethically is a net
positive to everyone around them there's
no downside of that you know and my book
has been criticized by people who've
read it very poorly especially chapter
one when I talk about hierarchies that
I'm somehow supporting the idea that
power in a hierarchy is the right way to
be and that's there's absolutely nothing
and what I've written that suggests that
at all like I'm suggesting that human
hierarchies are very complex and that
the way that you win in a human
hierarchy is by being competent and
reciprocal and so and so I mean for
example even if you're selfish let's say
you got to think very carefully about
what that would mean if you were selfish
and awake because you have to work to
take care of yourself and what you want
say in this moment but then there's you
tomorrow and there's you next week and
there's you next month the next year and
ten years from now and when you're old
so because you're self-conscious and
because you're aware of the future
you're actually a community unto
yourself and if you're selfish and
impulsive all that means is that you're
serving the person you are right now you
know in that
pulse of way but not the person you're
going to be and so that's not a good
grounds for any sort of ethical behavior
and I see that if you serve yourself
properly there's no difference between
that and serving your family properly
and serving your community properly that
those things all mesh in a kind of a
harmonious manner and one of the things
that's really being effective in the
lecture tour is a discussion about that
idea and its relationship between the
relationship between that and meaning
and responsibility because one of the
things that strikes the audience is
silent constantly because I'm always
listening to them to see you know when
when the attention is maximally focused
is whenever I point out to people that
the antidote to the meaninglessness of
their life and the suffering and the
malevolence that they might be
displaying because they're resentful and
bitter about how things have turned out
that a dote to that is to take on more
responsibility for themselves and for
other people and that that's
aspirational which is kind of cool you
know the conservative types the duty
types and I'm not complaining about them
you know that they're always basically
saying well this is how you should act
because in some sense that's your duty
right that's how a good citizen would
act and that's a reasonable argument but
the case that I've been making is more
that well there is a there is value
distinctions between things some things
are worth doing and some things aren't
and you can kind of discover what that
is for yourself and then you should aim
at the things that are most worth doing
and what you'll find if you watch
carefully is that the things that you
find worth doing are almost always
associated with an increase in
responsibility because if you think
about the people you admire for example
you spontaneously admire people and
that's a manifestation of the instinct
to imitate again people are very
imitative you don't admire people who
don't take care of themselves like
unless there's something wrong with you
you you at least want an admirable
person to be accountable for themselves
and then if they've got something left
over so they can be accountable for
their family well then that's a net plus
obviously that's someone you think is
solid and then maybe they take care of
some more people they have a business or
they're involved in the community in
some positive way you see well that's a
person whose pattern of being is worth
imitating and so and that's all
associated with responsibility and it's
so interesting because it's as if it's
as if everybody kind of knows this but
that it hasn't crystallized it's like
well you should be responsible because
that's what a good citizen is it's not
no no you should be responsible because
you need to have a deep meaning in your
life to offset the suffering so you
don't get bitter and the way you do that
is to bear a heavy load you know to get
yourself in and check for you now and
for you in the future and then to do the
same for your family in your community
and that there's real nobility in that
and there's real meaning and more the
other thing that I've been suggesting to
people and I also believe this is that
and I think that the guys that have come
to talk to me especially the ones that
have had real real rough life's they
really understand this if you don't get
your act together and you let yourself
slide then what kind of moves in to take
the place of what you could have been is
something that's really not good at all
so it's not only that if you're living
like a dissolute life that you're not
aiming at anything positive and so you
don't have any real meaning and you're
subsume by anxiety and all of that
hopelessness but something kind of
hellish moves in there - - to occupy
that place and so then you end up making
things worse and when you know one of
the things I learned about studying
totalitarian systems whether they were
on the right or the left was that part
of the reason that the totalitarian
horrors of the 20th century manifested
themselves was because average people
didn't take on the proper responsibility
they shut their eyes when their I should
have been open even though they knew it
and they didn't said things they knew
they shouldn't have done and said and
that was what supported those horrible
systems so you know if you don't get
your act together then you leave a
little space for hell and I really
believe that don't you think when things
are happening like something like Nazi
Germany I would imagine that during that
time the people that were not in support
of it felt helpless
whether you're you're in Germany you're
a part of this country this country is
turning towards this horrible situation
where Jewish people are being put in
trains and you know the people that
didn't speak out in that I don't
necessarily know if it's a lack of
discipline or just complete fear and
paralysis
it's our fear for sure I mean you know
knowledge of how to deal with it or who
is believed to wanting to protect your
family oh yeah absolutely
oh well that's the thing the problem is
that if you're gonna forestall that sort
of thing you have to do it early you
know because the longer you wait the
higher the price you pay for it but
isn't it so it's hard to take that jump
early because you're not exactly sure
where it's going that's true and your
and well and you're also likely to be
jumped on and you can see that happening
in our own culture you know you make a
mistake on Twitter or even something
that isn't a mistake and you know you
can pay a well what feels to be a pretty
high price now whether it is a high
price or not is hard to tell because
Twitter is so weirdly fictional you know
it's so hard to to to get your to get a
grasp on exactly what's going on well
it's it's also your comprehension of you
what what is the your emotional reaction
to people that you don't know being mean
to you like this is again what is that
price well and people some people want
to dismiss that as being not just
nothing it's not not that big a deal but
it is a big deal it causes people to
commit suicide I mean it has absolutely
bullying online has caused many people
to commit suicide when you the weird
thing about that online communication is
that like I find that I tend to react to
a negative Twitter comment as if it's
someone sitting across from me talking
to me that I know now it's not and I
don't even know if the person is real or
because the accounts are often anonymous
right so that person isn't really real
but your emotional response is still
well someone's gone out of their way to
be harshly critical to you right you
know and that doesn't happen that often
in your day to day life and so you know
if you're a reasonable person you're
very sensitive to criticism right
because it's rare and because you might
be wrong especially if there's a lot of
people criticizing you because you kind
of have to be psychopathic in order just
to brush that off you know it's like
well 100 people think I'm wrong there's
nothing to that it's like well if it's a
hundred people out of a hundred million
but you can't tell on Twitter right then
it's irrelevant but if it's a mob of a
hundred people that show up outside your
house which is quite kind of what
Twitter feels like then you think well
God you know I must have done something
wrong because otherwise why would all
these people be here right you know and
I think that's why so many people are
driven to apologize you know when they
when they do something on Twitter and or
do something and then the Twitter mobs
go after them they think oh god I must
have done something wrong I should I
should you know do some soul-searching
and yeah so some of that's not even fear
it's more like it's it's in a sense it's
a morality that's misplaced because of
our inability to calibrate the the
social messaging
I mean I've stopped almost completely
stopped reading Twitter comments in the
last month and I'm definitely better for
it oh yeah it's just it's too much it's
too much it's too crazy yeah it is your
number up to now the number of followers
about a million on Twitter that's that's
when it's about time to get out of Dodge
yeah yeah well I mean I'm still
following people and reading what people
are posting but no the comments I'm just
I'm just not worth it no it's not and
and I think it does have something to do
with the technology itself like I do
believe that that small limit
facilitates angry impulsive responding
perhaps so you're trying to get people
to respond to you but the alternative is
Facebook where you have these long posts
that are just rambling first drafts that
people put out like when it get good
money start ranting about politics and
what-have-you I just can't get involved
they're just too big and then people
jump in and comment on them and often
their comments are massive as well it's
just too verbose whereas the good thing
about Twitter is it makes you boil down
what you're trying to say do a very
succinct thing although I do enjoy when
someone has a good Twitter thread like
there was a really good Twitter thread
what was that gentleman's name
respectable lawyer double law
respectable law he wrote a long history
of the Sentinelese people that that you
know that's that uncontacted tribe in
the indian sea where they this gentleman
went there to try to commission here's
champion shot a full arrows yeah and he
wrote this long history of these people
and what what kind of what they've had
to endure with
being you know and a few people going to
them and doing some awful things and
diseases and stuff so I enjoy when
someone will do that like these long
like every now and then someone will use
it in a novel way I really like that but
there's um you know a lot of it is just
people just trying to get a reaction and
what's the reaction they can get by
pissing you off that's like the best one
well they also might be the ones that
are most like it we don't know exactly
know what motivates people to respond on
Twitter and it might be that the
fundamental motivation for a Twitter
response is anger yeah you know rather
than the desire to share something
because we don't know anything about how
these new communication techniques
functions psychologically maybe Twitter
is skewed 90% towards people who are
impulsively angry at that moment it
could easily be we don't know like you
know if you're driving in your car and
someone cuts you off you curse you know
at least I do and and it's often a
situational issue rather than a
personality flaw on the part of the
other driver even though it's easy to
assume that but you respond impulsively
I mean god only knows how much of our
social media networks are set up to
differentially reward impulsive behavior
and it's also not that easy to hold
people accountable in some sense and
maybe there's some utility to that but
with anonymous accounts and all of that
the anonymity is also problematic
because it certainly enables people to
allow their worse to manifest themselves
especially if they're resentful and
angry so the only benefit that I can see
to anonymity is it gives you the
opportunity to explore controversial
ideas without both true true use
correctly well that's it I said that
that's true I think there's there's some
utility I mean I don't think that it
should be forbidden but well like most
things it's that it has its advantages
and its disadvantages like most things
it's not entirely negative to be
anonymous hey so I figured something out
that I thought I'd tell you about just
took me like 30 years to figure out and
I figured it out on this tour so there's
this old idea you know that you have to
rescue your father from the belly of the
whale right from some monster that's
deep in the abyss you see that Pinocchio
for example but it's a very common idea
and I figured out why that is I think so
imagine that we are
no from a clinical perspective that you
know if you set out a path towards a
goal which you want to do because you
need a goal and you need a path because
that provides you with positive emotion
right so you set up something as
valuable so that implies a hierarchy you
set up something is valuable you decide
that you're gonna do that instead of
other things so that's kind of a
sacrifice because you're sacrificing
everything else to pursue that and then
you experience a fair bit of positive
emotion and meaning as you watch
yourself move towards the goal and so
the implication of that is that the
better the goal the the more full enrich
your experience is going to be when you
pursue it so that's one of the reasons
of that's one of the reasons for
developing a vision and for fleshing
yourself out philosophically because you
want to aim at the highest goal that you
can manage okay so you do that and then
what you'll find is that as you move
towards the goal there are certain
things that that that you have to
accomplish that frighten you you know
maybe you have to learn to be a better
speaker or a better writer or a better
thinker you have to be better to people
around you or you have to learn some new
skills and you're afraid of that
whatever because it's going to stretch
you if you if you pursue a goal and it's
and so that'll put you up against
challenges okay so all the clinical data
indicates or the opposite of safe spaces
as Jonathan Hite has been pointing out
that what you want to do when you
identify something that someone is
avoiding that they need to do because
they're afraid you have them voluntary
Colin Tara Lee confront it and so you
break it down what you try to do if
you're a behavior therapist is you break
down the thing they're avoiding into
smaller and smaller pieces until you
find a piece that's small enough so
they'll do it and it doesn't really
matter as long as they start it you know
then they can put the next piece on in
the next piece and what happens is they
don't get less afraid exactly they get
braver they get big it's like there's
more of them and you can and here's why
so imagine you do something new and
that's informative right there's
information in the action and then you
can incorporate that information and
turn it into a skill and turn it into a
transformation of your perceptions so
there's more to you because you've tried
something new so that's one thing but
the second thing is and there's good
biological evidence for this now that if
you put yourself in the new
situation then new genes code for new
proteins and build new neural structures
and new nervous system structures same
thing happens to some degree when you
workout right because your your muscles
are responding to the load but your
nervous system does that too so you
imagine that there's a lot of potential
you locked in your genetic code and then
if you put yourself in a new situation
then then the stress that's the
situational stress that's produced by
that particular situation unlocks those
genes and then builds new parts of you
and so that's very cool because who
knows how much there is locked inside of
you okay so now here's the idea so let's
assume that that scales as you take on
heavier and heavier loads that more and
more of you you get more and more
informed because you're doing more and
more difficult things but more and more
of you gets unlocked and so then what
that would imply is that if you got to
the point where you could look at the
darkest thing so that would be the abyss
right that would be the deepest abyss if
you could look at the harshest things
like the most brutal parts of the
suffering of the world and the
malevolence of people and society if you
could look that look at that straight
and and directly that that would turn
you on maximally and so that's the idea
of rescuing your father because imagine
that you're like the potential composite
of all your all the ancestral wisdom
that's locked inside of you biologically
but that's not going to come out at all
unless you stress yourself unless you
unless you challenge yourself and the
bigger the challenge you take on the
more that's going to turn on and so that
as you take on a broader and broader
range of challenges and you push
yourself harder then more and more of
what you could be turns on and that's
equivalent to transforming yourself into
the ancestral father and to all because
you're you're like the what would you
call it you're the consequence of all
these living beings that have come
before you and that's all part of your
biological potentiality and then if you
can push yourself then all of that
clicks on and that turns you into who
you could be that's and that's the
reason Tatian of that positive ancestral
father so that's
why you rescue your father from the
belly of the beast so you think that
this ultimate goal of sack of sacrifice
and of risking your life in order to
save someone who's truly important to
you that this somehow or another
maximizes your potential as a human
being well I think I think you can think
about it religiously - so you think
about it this way so in in the Christian
story for example you have Christ does
two things that are met messianic one is
takes the suffering of the world onto
himself because that's a weird idea okay
so what does that mean let's think about
it psychologically well maybe it means
that well that's your job is the world's
full of suffering and you should accept
that as your responsibility past present
and future you're supposed to do
something about that as much as you can
about it and maybe you start with your
own localized suffering you know put
yourself together but then you expand
that outward and you decide that it's
you're not a victim of that even though
you know you're part and parcel of it
but you're you're the potential solution
to that and so you accept that as a
responsibility
so that's part of taking on a load
that's part of bearing a cross you could
look at it that way the cross is sort of
a symbol of the place of maximal
suffering okay so you accept that as a
challenge not as a not as something that
you're victimized by maybe you accept
that as the price of being okay so
that's one that's one responsibility
you're responsible for addressing the
suffering in the world it's not to give
you some meaning seems to me then the
next thing is there's a story of course
that Christ met the devil in the desert
and so that's the encounter with
malevolence so that would be the other
thing because the two major problems
that people face obviously are suffering
tragedy and malevolence and so that's
the other thing that you're responsible
for is that you're supposed to look at
the capacity for human evil as clearly
as you possibly can which is a very
terrifying thing you know that causes
post-traumatic stress disorder in people
that aren't accustomed to it and in the
mythology that's associated with the
encounter with evil it's almost always
the case that the entity that does the
encountering even if it does it
voluntarily is is is hurt by it
so the
Egyptian god Horus for example who's the
eye and the Falken the thing that can
see and pay attention when he encounters
his evil uncle Seth who's the precursor
of Satan he loses an eye because it's no
joke to encounter malevolence you know
it can really shake you but the idea
would be that if you can face the
malevolence and you can face the
suffering then that maximally that opens
the door to your maximal potential and
then the option the optimistic part of
that is then this is this is why it's so
useful to peer into the darkness let's
say the optimistic part of that is is
that although the suffering is great and
the malevolence is is deep your capacity
to transcend it is stronger so what you
get out of the most negative viewpoint
is the most positive possible
consequence because one of the things
you'd like to know if you wanted to know
something deep about yourself is that
you could face the worst that there
wasn't prevail and I believe that's Kate
I believe that's I believe that that
people are capable of that I think that
despite how tragic life is and how
malevolent things are that fundamentally
our spirit let's say has the capacity to
to confront that and to fix it like
psychologically to confront it
courageously to be able to bear up under
that if you do it voluntarily but also
to address it not only to deal with it
psychologically but to deal with it
practically and that we could make
things much better there's always a
striving towards utopia right like this
is the ultimate goal that if you use ask
people what would you like out of
civilization well I'd like everyone to
be happy and everyone to get along and
there to be no war nothing no suffering
no anything but in order to really truly
learn about yourself and about life you
have to overcome adversity you have to
experience things and I firmly believe
that in order to truly appreciate love
you have to understand I really have
felt hate mm-hmm and to really
appreciate camaraderie
you have to feel loneliness so this is
just a part of being a person for
whatever reason like yeah well maybe you
see the other thing that I've been
thinking along the same lines is that
you know it isn't so in the in the
biblical stories in in Abrahamic stories
for example Abraham basically hangs
around his dad's tent till he's like
80 he's one of these guys that fails to
launch you know in a big way and God
eventually gets sick and tired of him
like you know playing video games in his
basement and says get the hell out there
into the world and have a life and so he
does he leaves his his father's tent and
it's his community and his and his
country which is what he's commanded to
do and then he goes out and has an
adventure but you know the first thing
he encounters is a famine and then he
encounters a tyranny and then he
encounters a bunch of people in the
tyrannical state that want to take his
wife and so you can imagine that
Abraham's response to that is like it
was a hell of a lot better sitting in my
dad's tent playing video games but
what's cool about that story what I
realized when I was doing the lectures
on it last year was that that was a call
to adventure you know and and that the
right way of conceptualizing what we're
talking about isn't that utopia would be
a place where everyone was happy because
because and I think because of what you
just laid out is you need that polarity
you know and people need a load and we
need adversity and we need difficulty we
need all of that
so maybe what you want is an adventure
the greatest adventure that you could
have and that would involve you know
something to push against it would
involve real challenge and so just a
seek the Dostoyevsky knew this because
when he wrote notes from underground
which I would highly recommend to
everyone who's listening it's a great
book and it's a very short book he he
criticized socialist utopia back in like
1860 way way before it became the sort
of widespread idea that that it is now
and what Dostoyevsky said was that while
human beings are these very peculiar
creatures and if you gave us our utopia
so that we had nothing to do but eat
cake and busy ourselves with the
continuation of the species that was
that was his line that the first thing
we do is smash it all to bits just so
that something unexpected and and and
troublesome would happen because we're
built for adventure and not for peace
and happiness
well we're designed to overcome the
natural world the natural world is
filled with that the natural world is
filled with things trying to eat this is
just everywhere you look that's all you
observe you observe predators and prey
and animals eating vegetables and that's
it and I think that this this concept of
overcoming adversity so it's so he
it's so a part of what we are that I
want to bring it back to you because one
of the things that I've been considering
is that I've said this many times and I
just had a conversation with my good
friend Steve Rinella the other day where
he brought it up independently he said I
think Jordan Peterson is the most
misunderstood and misinterpreted guy in
the world
he's like people are always like not
just misinterpret but miss stating what
you believe in misstating what you say
this opposition to you this I mean like
we were talking about this GQ interview
which I thought was I thought that woman
was far more intelligent than the and
her approach was far better and far more
reasoned and well thought-out than some
of the other attacks on you before so
they're bringing in the varsity level
players what I'm saying but I think this
is important I think this is part of
what with what forges this message is
that you are and you and this one of the
things that Eric Weinstein and I had
said about you is that you're
essentially the the hoist Gracy of the
intellectual dark web if you don't know
what that means is the early days of the
UFC no one knew what the best martial
art was and the idea was like there was
all these martial arts that are running
around independently and that they were
all claiming that they had the best
technique and let's see what happens and
hoist gracie was the one who represented
jiu-jitsu and went out there and beat
all these people with superior technique
and superior strategy south american yes
he's from Brazil yeah okay and he
launched this Brazilian Jew and his
family launched this Brazilian jiu-jitsu
empire that has since taken over the
world of martial arts but you are the
one who's consistently engaging in these
people you're the one who's involved
these valley to toe events where you're
debating these people who are coming at
you hostile with notes and I think is is
uncomfortable as those moments are like
who was the woman that said so what
you're trying to say I can't lose Newman
gasher I think her approach I think she
misunderstood you I think she
underestimated you I think she
misinterpreted who you are and she
thought that she could come at you with
this
strawman sort of article and argument
rather in frame your positions in a very
unflattering way it just didn't work no
it just was it was like the early days
of hoist Gracie guys would come out I'm
flailing and he'd get them in an armbar
and they tap out and they'd go fuck
that's kind of what happened with you
but now this woman who you had this
conversation with in GQ she was much
more skilled you know she was better
verbally she be sure her arguments made
more sense you have seen more reasonable
more well-read you know she was able to
think on her feet quicker but still
these are really important conversations
well it was a funny day because I went
to the to the hotel room in Baltimore
you know and I went out of my way to do
it and she was hostile to me the second
I walked into the room really yes and
and that really kind of put me off what
did you how so well she basically told
me that we were going to have a war you
know not so many words that that but
just there was a coldness to her and a
distaste for me that was sort of
radiating from her see she had a--
she was animus possessed from a union
perspective that's the right way of
thinking about it one of the ways of
thinking about that is that she had a
chip on her shoulder and relationship to
me so she had already formulated who I
was in her imagination and she it was
also maybe a form of projection so like
I was the embodiment of all the things
that she found distasteful and that's
who she was so there was no there was no
willingness to consider on her part that
I could be different than her
preconceptions of yes right and so she
was she was hostile to me in the way
that you would be if you were prejudiced
against someone right from the beginning
and so by the time it was uncomfortable
in the room and by the time and there
was a photo shoot and so by the time the
conversation started I was more
impatient than I would normally be
because one of the things that I do
expect from journalists and Kathy Newman
was like this by the way and so of some
of the other people that gonna have gone
after me at least they had the
professionalism to be civil before the
interview started no like because
there's a certain amount of politeness I
would say that
not that I'm old but that someone you're
interviewing is owed yes if they come
out of their way to go talk to you it's
just human decency yes so there's no
real conflict right until you have this
conflict it's just hello nice to meet
you yes thank you for coming to human
beings interacting with each other yes
yes on well on relatively professional
well even just professional writing just
professional grounds it's like well
we're both here to do a job and I've
agreed to come but but no there was
palpable enmity in the air right to
begin with and you know when I actually
thought at the end of that interview I
thought geez you know maybe I'm maybe
I've done enough interviews because I
found that I was more impatient than I
would have liked to have been now
luckily it doesn't seem to have gone
overboard because I've been watching the
comments on that GQ interview and I
think it's got about four and a half
million views some ridiculous number of
views and people have said that I was
more impatient and a little harsher than
usual which i think is true and I
thought God you know maybe I'm starting
to run out of patience which isn't good
right right I don't want to run out of
patience because then it it will flavor
the message that you're putting out
definitely and people will take it in
the wrong way and they'll take it in
with that bitterness yes exactly
yeah you know one of the things that I
think is very important is that you
don't become resentful like and and well
and and you know when I'm on this tour
for example like there's no resentment
for me because you think well this is
you might think well this is a lot of
work and I've been running around like
mad and and you know it takes a lot of
organization and it's quite demanding
and all of that and that's all true and
that none of that is a complaint and I
decided with Tammy right at the
beginning that well first of all that
this was going to be work and not a
vacation because we're not stupid we
know you can't have everything at the
same time if you have any sense you're
lucky if you get some things that are
good at once you know so we're very
grateful to have that opportunity and
that I was going to continue to do this
as long as I was thrilled to be in front
of the audience and then when I meet
people afterwards that I'm not looking
at the end of the line to see when the
night ends you know because I want to be
sure that every single person that comes
to meet me
I'm you know president present for
absolutely cuz I am I am actually quite
taken aback and thrilled I guess is the
right word grateful rats better us that
they're there it's like God man some of
these people you know like I was in
there coming from all over the place you
know people fly in from Australia into
Europe they've they've flown they've
flown it's lots of Eastern Europeans
came to England like they're making huge
tracks or his guys who came from like
eight
they took him like twelve hours to get
through Russia to come to Finland to
watch the talk there you know and and
and then not just a few people like that
people are really going way the hell out
of their way you know and then and then
they line up and it's not that it's not
inexpensive because these venues are
expensive and and all of that and I'm
well I'm I'm do it and it's the same
with the damn interviews it's like I'm
doing my best to not take any of this
for granted and not get annoyed about it
and and that goes for the conflict too
it's like well you know I've tried to
have my agent screen out maybe the more
egregious interviews you know the ones
that would just be nothing but combat
because there I find them quite
stressful though I wouldn't say I'm
hiding from them but you don't know to
begin with how an interview is going to
go and I could just say well I'm done
having interviews and for a while but I
I can't help but see that the conflict
is a necessary part of this even though
I don't find it pleasant like people
think they accused me of being a
provocateur of enjoying the conflict
it's actually not true at all I don't
enjoy it at all it usually takes me
about three days to recover from like
particularly contentious interview you
know because I find it I find conflict
interpersonal conflict quite stressful
yes you know but everyone does yes and
to pretend you don't you're either a
sociopath or you're a liar yes yes well
there are people who seem to enjoy that
kind of intellectual combat you know
that they yeah and the political types
are more like that but but I think they
still afterwards feel it and if they
read the comments and people are against
them
that the unnies it carries well you
would think so I mean I don't even know
how people deal with it because I mean
I'm being fortunate because although you
know I've had a fair bit of negative
press coverage the comments in on
YouTube in particular which is where of
the bulk of them are and and I would say
among the general public have been
overwhelmingly positive I don't know
what the hell it would be like to be in
a world where that was reversed where
you know the majority of people are
against you I've seen I've seen it
happen with guests that I've had on the
show where I've met them afterwards and
you see a physical effect on them you
see them beaten down like Jesus Christ
those comments are so mean I'm like you
can't read those you can't read those
and you see how it's affecting them like
they can't sleep they really yeah it
fucks with them they'll stay up for
nights you know it's not good it's it's
you're you're you're taking in all of
these opinions of hundreds if not
thousands of people you don't even know
you know if they're coming from a
healthy place and and most of those
opinions they would not express it that
way if they were talking yeah I think
he'd get the same message across like I
think you were ignorant to these facts I
think you are biased in your perceptions
even if they had an opinion that was
unflattering the way that are express it
to you they'd be considerate about you
and your your feelings as a human being
and if they weren't you wouldn't take
into consideration what they're saying
because these guys just an asshole yeah
right but when you just see it in type
we just see print it just doesn't it
just it could be a smart person it could
be a psycho it could be a fool it could
be anything
well it's also funny too because that
the negative comments that are part of
social media seemed to be just as potent
as negative comments in real life but
the positive comments don't seem to be
as positive as the positive comments in
real life yes like I don't they don't
seem as real and I guess that's partly
because we're wired you know to be more
sensitive to threat and to negative
emotion because well because we're we
can be hurt well it's also healthy to to
not stroke your ego too much if you're
just like concentrating only on their
like like there's something distasteful
if you go to someone's page and they
just retweet all the positive things
that people say to them because then
eyes are sort of reinforcing slightly
people know that I say so
really positive to Jordan he's gonna
retweet me mm-hmm there are some people
that they engage in this sort of
Commerce mm-hmm you know like you say
something positive they retweet you and
you know it's it's a little it's a
little too strokey right now right
people get really into that stroking
their own butt yeah yeah well I guess
yeah I guess the danger of that is that
possibility of that ego inflation that
you only want to avoid because that's a
bad ideas oh that's a very bad idea
you've done a wonderful job of avoiding
those waters because this is a new this
for a guy who's in his 50s who becomes
famous out of nowhere
and doesn't just becomes Fame Justin
just become famous but becomes this
culturally significant sort of lightning
rod I mean that's how I view you and a
lot of these talks you're doing a lot of
these these debates like you're having
with this woman at GQ or some of your
your interviews what you're doing is
you're expressing yourself in a brave
but very controversial way and a lot of
people are paying attention to this but
then you're backing it up with your
research you're backing it up with real
science you're backing up with a
tremendous amount of history of of the
the human race and of religion and of
the scientific studies that have been
done that show correlations between
different types of behaviors and human
beings and all this is rich it's it's
very it's very rewarding if you could
take it all in but when it goes against
what people have their preconceived
notions or their own set of beliefs that
they're bringing to your conversations
into your debates then it creates this
hostile battle where what you're saying
is is is very contrary to what the way
they've been living their life or the
resource be really saw that in
Scandinavia Scandinavia yeah well I was
there I went to Stockholm twice in Oslo
twice in Helsinki twice and and and
Copenhagen once in the last month and I
spent quite a bit of there was a lot of
interviews and a lot of discussion about
the so-called gender paradox now it's a
very interesting thing because it's
really put their tails in a knot in
Scandinavia and and that makes sense
because the Scandinavians are going to
have
deal with this first because they've
gone the farthest down the road for like
making their society gender equal but
explain that to me I don't mind I will I
will okay so so imagine first of all
that there's two kinds of equality that
you might pursue one would be equality
of opportunity and so that would mean
that you know there's there's wide range
of talent across people regardless of
their type whatever that might be sex
gender race ethnicity there's there's
talent distributed everywhere and it's
kind of a truism and I would say a
truism of the West in the deepest sense
that each of the individuals within
those groups should be put in a position
where they their talents are they're
encouraged to manifest those talents
partly because that would be good for
them spiritually and psychologically but
also because that would be of obvious
benefit to the community right I mean
talents rare which people don't
understand there's lots of different
kinds of talent but it's but in each
domain it's rare and so it's to
everyone's benefit to exploit talented
people to the maximum possible degree so
even if you're just selfish you want to
push for equality of opportunity because
the more talented people there are out
there the more cool stuff you get to
have and hopefully the the more diverse
and interesting your life is so so you
can pursue equality of opportunity
policies and the Scandinavians have done
that especially trying to knock down
barriers for women in the workplace and
by all accounts by all standard theories
the Scandinavian countries and places
like like whole like the Netherlands
Canada to to a slightly lesser degree
have done a have gone farther than any
other countries in pursuing those
policies okay and and and part of the
consequence of that is that some of the
differences between men and women have
been minimized so obviously there's far
more women in the workplace than there
were forty years ago and many
occupations there's actually dominance
by women there's dominance in the
universities there's dominance in the
health care fields and so women have
poured into the workplace and hype
pathetically there's problems with that
because it's put a lot of stress on
family structure but hypothetically
that's for the best and because it gives
people a broader range of choices and it
gives everyone access to more talent so
and then also if you look around the
world you see that one of the best
predictors of the probability of
economic development in developing
countries is their attitude is the
attitude in those countries towards
equal rights for women and it looks
causal the more positively the country
is predisposed to female rights the more
likely they are to develop economically
and maybe that's because that indicates
that they're open to new ideas or
something like that or open to
transformation so okay so that's one
kind of equality open up the playing
field so that everybody has a chance to
compete and cooperate in lent and land
where they will but then the other kind
of equality is equality of outcome so
and that's often described as equity and
today's language and so the ultimate
equity utopia would be take every job
every conceivable kind of job and then
stratify that by every conceivable level
of authority within every job and then
ensure that every single category of
person is represented in precise
proportion to their to their prevalence
in the population so every job should be
50 percent women and 50 percent men and
say 13 percent non-western ethnic
minority and whatever that happens to be
and then you could break that down and
so and otherwise there's evidence of
systemic prejudice okay now first thing
to say about that is that's impossible
and the reason it's impossible is
because there's no limit to the number
of ways that you can categorize people
into groups so you know you you know
about sex and ethnicity and race maybe
those are the obvious ones but now you
have gender and then you have ethnicity
and you know and then there's
attractiveness and intelligence and
temperament and and height and age and
socio-economic background and I mean
let's say there's twenty but there's a
lot more than that there's no possible
way that you could ever regulate a
society so tightly that every single one
of those groups was equally represented
in everything
one of those occupations at every single
level of the hierarchy the significant
ones men and women and race yeah but
who's to say those are the significant
ones that's the other thing
it isn't even obviously if they are
because I would say that like a more
significant one is cognitive ability
because that's a way bigger predictor of
long-term life success than sex or race
so I don't even think that we've
necessarily identified the canonical
groups we've just decided the gender and
race are though maybe they're the most
obvious right but isn't there a problem
is that people don't that what what they
don't do is they don't take in in terms
of cognitive ability they don't get on a
team they don't get on like the there's
people that are sexist yeah but there's
it's very rare that someone is elitist
in terms of their cognitive ability well
hard to say Joe I mean I think one of
the reasons that should entail lead is
prejudiced is a better word I don't know
I mean it you could be right but look I
think one of the reasons that like if
you here's something that's kind of
actually make sense now that I'm
thinking about it because they are it's
well there's one thing that's quite
peculiar about the United States in that
regard is like most working-class people
let's say are far more irritated with
the intellectual elite than they are
with the wealthy elite and that's
because they think they could become
wealthy and they could but they don't
think they could become part of the
intellectual elite and it isn't obvious
to me that the intellectual elite so
those would be the liberal left-leaning
types that dominate the media and
academia are particularly positive in
their in their attitudes towards the
typical working-class person I think
they're prejudiced and elitist I do
believe that that's the case and I think
they're also what would you call it
patronizing and I think that the typical
working-class person say who voted for
Trump is very very sensitive to that and
so they're much more concerned with the
1% who are the cognitive elite than they
are the 1% who are the economic elite
because at least they think that's a
game they could play so anyways it's
also because there's caricatures right
of the the 1% of the economic elite you
just think of people that are in these
lofty positions that are in control the
financial institutions but the 1% of the
intellectually
you think of in terms of like some of
the more preposterous things you're
hearing out of universities now and save
spaces and oh yeah there's that too yeah
there's that too things that there's no
well there's no appreciation on the part
of the intellectual elite for the
pathologies of rational of rationalism I
mean there's no there's nothing stupider
than a smart person who went wrong hmm
you know like you you can tank on I've
seen this in my clients you know
frequently like if I have a particularly
smart client who's particularly
disordered in their personality that
that's just that's often just that's so
difficult it's almost unimaginable
because there's for example yet what is
your approach to handling something like
that who's like super intelligent but
yet completely their life is in disarray
well you know I'm usually I usually take
a very practical approach like you know
we try to identify because I start
always in my therapy practice I always
start with behavioral principles it's
like okay well let's see if we can
identify a few areas you know through
negotiation that are really causing you
grief and misery you know like what's
what's wrong with your life as far as
you're concerned and so that often takes
a lot of discussion and then we might
try to figure out what's causing that
and that's often very difficult to
figure out too because it might be jeez
it might be something physical you know
you might be sick in some way because
depression is lots of depression is
autoimmune related and and anxiety can
be a side effect of all sorts of
physiological disorders or eating
improperly or sleeping badly or or not
exercising you know enough to kind of
keep yourself regulated to try to figure
out what's what's causing it and then
you try to sketch out some possible
solution that we could both test and
then with the with the with the more
intelligent ones you know often they can
come up with all sorts of reasons why
none of this is going to work or a
thousand reasons why yeah well usually a
thousand reasons why none of this is
going to work and with people like that
sometimes it's useful to turn to their
dreams if if they dream because one of
the things that's cool about dreams is
that even though they're hard to
interpret they never lie and so
sometimes you can take someone who's
hyper-rational and have a dream and
they'll tell you the dream and then you
can work through an interpretation which
is a tricky business and the dream will
tell them something
there's just no denying it it's like
well it's a statement from nature so
what are you gonna do you're gonna
pretend that that's not the case you
know so so that's that's often extremely
useful so so okay so well back to the
Equality issue so okay so here's what's
happened
so psychologists have and this is what's
putting a tail knot in the tail of the
Scandinavians psychologists have come to
a pretty decent agreement about standard
personality models right so there's
extraversion neuroticism agreeableness
openness and conscientiousness and they
look fairly stable cross-culturally and
that was all done by asking thousands of
people hundreds and hundreds of
questions and then grouping them
statistically so it was a theoretical
basically compute card took
computational power and statistics to to
find out that these are how traits group
so an extroverted people are sociable
and happy and neurotic people experience
a fair bit of negative emotion so that's
the positive and negative emotion
dimensions agreeable people are maternal
and disagreeable people are competitive
and there's a fair bit of male/female
difference there conscientious people
are dutiful and industrious and orderly
and the open people are creative and so
those are your basic five dimensions
okay so that's been established and
everyone more or less agrees on it now
maybe there's seven dimensions and we've
got a questionnaire that that that
breaks the five down into ten that's
called understand myself but but
basically there's good there's good
consensus consent consensus on the five
okay so now as soon as you have the five
basic traits you can ask some questions
like well do men and women differ and so
what you do is you just give the
questionnaire you can either fill it out
yourself or have other people fill it
out on your behalf so and it could be a
teacher could be a parent you know and
that's all been done and what you find
is there are systematic differences
between men and women and the biggest
differences are that women experience
more negative emotion and that and that
they're more agreeable than men so and
that's borne out by the psychiatric
evidence because higher levels of
negative emotion are manifested in
depression and anxiety and women are
diagnosed with higher levels of
depression and anxiety
all around the world and with
agreeableness that's also borne out by
the clinical literature in some sense
the medical literature socio medical
literature because disagreeable people
are more likely to be incarcerated
because it's the best predictor of being
incarcerated even though it's not a very
good predictor and men are incarcerated
at about a 10 to one rate compared to
women and are more likely to be
antisocial and conduct disordered so the
personality differences are mirrored in
the socio medical literature okay so
that's so now so there are differences
but then there's a question are those
differences a consequence of
socialization or are they biological and
the answer to that is tricky because how
much something is social and how much it
is biological actually depends on the
social circumstances
so while here's an example if you have a
society where no one has enough to eat
and people are starving then there's a
huge cultural effect on people's
intelligence let's say that's mediated
by economic factors even though it's got
a biological origin right that's the
starvation so the relationship between
biology and cultures are actually partly
culturally dependent so it makes it
complicated but in any case here's how
the scientists decided to address this
they thought well why don't we rank
order countries by how egalitarian their
social policies are which you can do
with a fair degree of reliability you
know you put the countries where women
are second-class citizens at the bottom
and you'd put the Scandinavian countries
at the top you can get good reliability
across raiders for how you'd rate those
countries and then look at the magnitude
of the differences between men and women
by the egalitarian social policies and
so then you'll find out and here's the
hypothesis if the difference is between
men and women are primary primarily
social then as cultures become more
egalitarian men and women will become
more alike that's not what happened the
opposite happened the more egalitarian
this society and it turns out the richer
this society because that's also being
discovered now the more different men
and women become and so the differences
are not huge so with agreeableness for
example
if you took the average man if you took
a typical man and a typical woman out of
the population just randomly and you had
to bet that the woman was more
aggressive than the man you'd be wrong
60% of the time so there's quite a bit
of overlap right because you'd be right
40% of the time but the problem is is
that a lot of selection takes place at
the extremes maybe you're only concerned
about disagreeable people when they
become violent and maybe it's only the 1
in 50
most disagreeable person who's violent
and they're all men so you can have
quite a bit of similarity at the average
level and big differences at the
extremes and the extremes is where
people do things like like employment
selection so the biggest difference
that's been discovered between men and
women and this is the one that gets
biggest in the Scandinavian countries is
interest men are more interested in
things and women are more interested in
people and it's a big difference it's
one full standard deviation and so what
that means is that if you are a man you
would have to be more interested in
people than 85% of men to be as
interested in people as the 50th
percentile woman and you'd have to be
more interested in things than 85% of
women to be as interested in things as
the typical man and what are you how do
you define things objets okay no no no
inanimate things cars Corrick yeah yeah
tools yeah you know technology right
right stem feeis guess the other thing
that's happened is that the more
egalitarian the society the fewer women
go into the STEM fields
the fewer that's interested yeah okay so
so now this unravels in a big way it's
like this is a hugely relevant issue
politically because it means that you
cannot have equality of opportunity and
equality of outcome at the same time
it's not possible because as you make
your society more egalitarian and you
open up the opportunity for equality of
outcome you increase how different men
and women are and that changes their
occupation
choice so if men are more interested in
things which they are by a substantial
margin then way more of them are going
to be engineers wouldn't that possibly
support this idea that an enforced model
of equality would allow people to be
themselves more I mean this is almost
what you're saying well that does that
is the optimistic viewpoint like hello
mister well look it's so funny because
the Swedish foreign minister told me to
go climb back under the rock that I came
out from under when I was in Scandinavia
because I was describing this these this
science
I read that but I'm not exactly sure why
well she regards me as misogynist
because I think that there are because I
think because I've been putting forward
the evidence that there are genuine
differences between men and women but
she should be held accountable for that
because that's just a flippant thing to
say like you should have especially in a
position of power like she's in you
should have a very specific argument
saying like for a leader to have such a
base thing to say such a crude um thing
to say
crawl back under the rock that you came
yeah well I thought she was a joke about
lobsters but I don't think she was the
rock lobsters going to rocks I guess
they did the groan cracks yeah and the
bigger lobsters have better rocks that
was another very interesting thing in
the GQ thing where the woman was
challenging you on your neurobiology yes
well hardly hardly any hardly any
psychologists understand that serotonin
is associated with hierarchies it's like
a truism it's been known for thirty
years so we can definitely get back to
it but I'm very curious about this but
you know this idea of enforced equality
right ensuring that there is such a high
emphasis plate placed on a quality
quality that you have the equal amount
of men the equal amount of women and the
opportunities are absolutely available
as much to women as they are to you and
this is enforced you know that this
creates an environment where there's
less resistance now in an environment
where there's less resistance perhaps
women don't feel as compelled to say
I'll show you yeah
that is what seems to have but this is
though well here's an icky look here's
an example so
there are fewer women mathematicians in
the end the higher echelon okay but
here's something interesting about
mathematical ability first of all it's
very rare so that's the first thing to
keep in mind now it looks like if you
look in junior high that give
mathematically gifted men and males and
females are approximately as common now
there's a little bit of debate about
that because there is some evidence that
maybe at the very upper extremes there's
a male advantage just like there's a
male disadvantage at the low end because
the male distribution for intelligence
might be flatter and so that's the
greater marry male variability
hypothesis there's been papers putting
that forward that have been retracted as
a consequence of pressure from
politically correct people even though
greater merit male variability is
actually quite common in the animal
kingdom for a variety of reasons men are
more expendable that males are more
expendable in some ways or you could say
that males are more likely to produce to
pursue high-risk high-return strategies
you can look at it either way and it's
certainly possible in any case the men
the males in junior high who happened to
be mathematically gifted are less likely
to also be verbally gifted whereas that
doesn't seem to be the case for the
females and so if you're a male math
nerd then math is a pretty logical
pathway for you because you don't have
as many other options whereas if you're
female math nerd you have other options
because you're all you're less likely
you're more likely to also be verbally
gifted and so that's enough to at least
in principle account for some of the
reason why there are fewer women
mathematicians than men mathematicians
they have other options they have other
options and there's lots of complex
there's lots of complex reasons like
this and so we have this reflexive idea
and this is very much the case because
this is like the core idea among the
feminist neo-marxist types is that if
there's differences in outcome that's
that's proof of prejudice and that's
support for the idea of the patriarchal
tyranny and that's like the core axiom
of the radical left is the patriarchal
tyranny as far as I'm concerned that's
that's God for them the patriarchal
tyranny it's like well if it turns out
that many of these differences in
outcome between men and women aren't a
consequence of the Patriot
tyranny in fact even get bigger when you
reduce the tyrannical aspect of the
patriarchy and even the patriarchal
aspect to it then it makes that theory
not only wrong but opposite of the truth
which is the worst kind of wrong and so
you know if men are more likely to
produce pursue careers in the STEM
fields which seems to be the case under
conditions of optimal freedom for men
and women then that's going to drive
income disparities because the STEM
fields pay more and they pay more partly
because they're scalable like it's
really hard to scale care for people you
know like if you work in a daycare
you're gonna care for three infants
you're not gonna care for 50 because you
can't it's not scalable but if you're
like a software designer it's infinitely
scalable and so there's there's a much
wider range of possible of possibility
for generating much larger much larger
income pools and much larger pools of
wealth you know and men are also more
likely to work longer hours and if you
work 10% longer hours you make 40% more
money there's a nonlinear return on
that's good thing for everybody who's
listening to know if you have a job you
want to be the guy or the woman who's
working that extra 10% because the
return on that is nonlinear so that's a
really useful thing to know men are more
likely to work outside they're more
likely to work in dangerous businesses
they're more likely to run full-time
businesses rather than part-time
businesses and they're more likely to
move in pursuit of their career goals
and that all contributes to differences
in and and in in mangu BER drivers
they're they make 7% more money because
they drive faster so and so anyway this
is not good high return issues it's a
pattern mail it's more risk there's more
risk in it so there's more return as
long as you don't get hurt right and I
think that's a pretty common male
pattern is there's more risk is there's
more return as long as you don't get
hurt problem seems to be when discussing
these things in anyway romanticizing or
glorifying male behavior or putting any
emphasis whatsoever on there being a
positive aspect to a lot of things that
we think of as being negative like
or ambition or or yes or competition
yeah yeah well the competition amongst
men is fine competition with men against
women is often thought of as cruel
mm-hmm yeah well that yes well and
there's a certain amount of reason for
that as well because obviously physical
competition is it's easy for that to
border on cruel this is why we're sure
we were talking before the show that
instead of calling people men and women
when referring to like because there's
there's this very disturbing in my
opinion trend of transgender women
entering into these competitions now
with women who are biologically female
you know and dominating them yeah and
that instead of calling people men and
women let's dispense with you you could
be a woman yeah you can be a man or
woman that's your choice and you can
change it whenever you want so you're a
man or a woman though and that's your
choice but we're gonna have a new rule
which is that if you have an X Y
chromosome so you're an X Y person or an
X X person then if you're an X X person
X Y person you don't get to engage in
physical combat with an X Y person yes
man or 1x expert doesn't matter yeah how
would that if you're XY you can't engage
in physical combat with XS that's right
XY z-- cannot hit X X's how's that and
maybe they can't run in running contests
against them and maybe they can't play
tennis against them not within and maybe
that's just reasonable there is reason
yes it is certainly it is reasonable but
if you you talk about that especially
someone like you who was you were
against this bill that was going to
enforce these pronouns and the
compelling the use of these pronouns
that your thought to be a transphobic
person yeah because you feel like there
maybe should be some rational discussion
about the physical limitations of
certain body structures because that's
what it is if you're talking about my
field of business you're talking about
combats moons right I've been involved
in combat sports my whole life and there
is a difference mm-hmm and it's not to
say that females aren't aren't competent
and I mean I had Mariam Nakamoto on
yesterday she's a good friend of mine
she's an eight-time world muy Thai
champion and she's a monster
but she doesn't fight against men and
she shouldn't fight against men although
she probably could beat a bunch of them
right it's not she should have to and
she's tough women a tough woman can beat
a variety of men oh yes a really tough
man can beat all women yes right so
that's the problem that's the reality
yes and that is definitely you know and
people don't like to hear these things
and they don't they want to pretend that
you can even out the playing field with
hormones no you can even it a little
there's certain things like I've always
said you if you gave Brock Lesnar a sex
change and put him in a dress he's gonna
run through every woman that's ever
lived in the history of women there's
not a single woman it's gonna be able to
deal with that bone structure and that
that mind that that guy has had with
testosterone pumping through it for 39
years you just it's preposterous that
even have to have to have the discussion
it's so so absolutely ridiculous to have
a trans woman compete against women and
mixed martial arts I was like you want
to have them do it in chess you want to
have them do it in something that's
non-physical sure you want them to be a
woman yes okay you want them to be
recognized as a woman you sure
but it's mr. compelling people like
here's one that's going up lately if you
don't want to date a trans woman then
you're some sort of a bigot but if
you're a man even if you want family you
know you remember in in brave new world
in Huxley's book it was considered
immoral to reject anyone's sexual
advances because it was prejudicial oh
yes and the thing is it is prejudicial
that's the thing now but but this is so
that makes the question even more
interesting because the the question is
at what point do you have the right to
your prejudices right and what one of
the things that we seem to cling to and
I would say rightly is that we're
allowed to be prejudiced when it comes
to who we interact with sexually and
then and who we choose as friends and
that's right that's the right to
Association and you know you say only up
to a certain point well that's this is
it because this this new
logic is kind of leaking into sexual
preference you know like if you have a
problem with someone being overweight
yeah then you're you're a size' store
something yeah like what is that well
the thing is is that you can't have
preferences without having prejudices of
course right so that's a big that's a
big issue so what does that mean you
don't get to have any preferences how's
that going to work out in terms of like
what you like to eat or what kind of
films you enjoy or what kind of books
you read you're allowed to have these
preferences but when it comes to what
you're sexually attracted to there's new
emphasis now trying to draw that line
and and say wait but it's preposterous
people that are pushing this and almost
everybody's pushing back but I find it
interesting well it's a logical it's a
logical conclusion to all these other
things that have been happening because
that is where the rubber hits the road
it's like you know when when I when I
well I I've seen this in in debates that
I've had publicly where people you know
talk about prejudice and I've pointed
out to them that they have prejudicial
attitudes with regards to their sexual
preferences because they don't just
sleep with anyone who asks them right so
it's like well how is that not a
prejudice well of course it's a
prejudice well then the question is
under what circumstances our prejudice
is justifiable and that's a conversation
we don't like to have because we believe
that there are no circumstances
whatsoever under which prejudices are
are acceptable this is a big difference
between prejudices and discrimination I
think those to get conflated yes there
is a big difference between prejudice
and discrimination right there's an
early discrimination has to do with
setting your standards in relationship
to the task at hand yes right that
that's what you'd hope for that that's
the appropriate form of discrimination
rights that's like intelligence sure
everything and everything isn't the same
about everything all the time
so you discriminate you rank order
things and you need to rank order them
even to pursue things that are valuable
this is one of the problems with the
people who are so anti hierarchy like
the like the radical leftists well there
shouldn't be hierarchies it's like okay
then why do something well that that
argument is so foolhardy that it's it's
difficult to take seriously but you do
have to engage in it and I think when
you engage in it it's really fascinating
to
because there's it's like you're playing
a game of chess with someone only has a
couple of pieces they have the strong
move that they do but you've got all
these other pieces and you're like well
let's just keep this game going until
this comes this illogical conclusion
which is checkmate there's there's
hierarchies all throughout nature it
doesn't mean people should suppress
people it doesn't mean people shouldn't
have rights it doesn't mean people
should enforce themselves or force
themselves on other folks that's not
what it mean it also doesn't mean that
the hierarchies especially if they're
human hierarchies then well or or or
that they're only that's right not that
they're good necessarily or that they're
predicated on power like one of the most
pathological elements of the postmodern
types especially people like Foucault is
their insistence that all hierarchical
structures are predicated on power and
that there's nothing other than power
and that's completely preposterous I
mean I use examples of plumbers in my
lectures more recently because it's
rather comical it's like well on what
basis do you hire a plumber so imagine
that there's a hierarchy of plumbers
ranging from very successful to very
unsuccessful okay and you say well what
makes plumbers successful well the power
theory would would imply that there are
roving bands of mafiosi ol plumbers who
like come pounding on your door at 3:00
in the morning and tell you that if you
don't get their particular posse to fix
your pipes leaking or not that they're
gonna come and burn down your house of
course that's completely it's completely
absurd when you go to hire someone like
a plumber well the first thing you want
to know is reputation can they actually
fix a pipe because you actually want
your pipe fixed and then you want to
know well do they deal with you fairly
and part of what's tangled up and that
in all likelihood is do they deal with
their employees fairly because that's
going to make their business function
properly and so the hierarchy of
plumbers which is part of the
patriarchal tyranny is almost entirely
predicated on competence as almost every
enterprise in the West is like that
because I keep wondering well where the
hell is this patriarchal tyranny like is
it massage therapists is it nurses like
most nurses are female if you get
females organized into a hierarchy which
you do in nursing is that all of a
sudden is that part of the patriarchal
tyranny
or is it the fact that no all those
people are women does that mean it's no
longer well it's still a hierarchy is it
no longer a tyranny is it no longer
patriarchal like is it patriarchal only
because there's men in it or is it
patriarchal because it's a hierarchy all
of this stuff is so incoherent that it
just all you have to do is think about
it and and and that hasn't been done to
any great degree and it just dissolves
in your hands yes that's what I'm saying
is that if you're entering into a job
straight out of college you leave
University and now you're entering into
you know your first year in the
workplace it's it's just a natural fact
of life that there's going to be people
that are further ahead in this race than
you because they're better at what they
do some experience maybe some of them
are more crooked and sneaking tools well
because but it's the it's the agreeing
everyone agreeing that this is a game
yeah this is some sort of a competition
yes and you're gonna have hierarchies
and competitions you're gonna get people
who win you're gonna have people who do
better yes no matter what the that's the
fundamental issue as soon as you so we
could look at it this way as soon as you
let's assume people have problems
everybody can agree on that and then we
could assume that people would like
solutions to those problems so we could
agree on that then we could say well
then if you implement a solution
socially so with other people then
you're going to cooperate and compete in
relationship to the solution and that's
instantly gonna produce a hierarchy
because no matter what the problem is
some people are going to be better at
solving it than others and then if you
have any sense you put the people who
are good at solving it at the forefront
because then they solve it faster and
cheaper and better and then everybody
benefits but then you get a hierarchy
right the people who solve those
problems get financial incentive to
stall those solve those problems yes and
they and they do that because the rest
of us are greedy and desperate it's like
you know we want the people who are good
at solving the problems to keep solving
them and so what we're trying to do is
to reward them so that they'll keep
doing it even if it's difficult to give
them some status extraordinarily if
necessary yes when you look at the
people that are the the head of giant
industry the the CEOs of super
successful companies they're the ones
who are the giant yachts and the big
houses and this is the incentive for
people to try to get to that position
and the
idea that there's no incentive and then
there should be no incentive but yet
you're still gonna have all this
innovation is ridiculous it's not how it
works it's not how human beings work if
human beings are going to work really
hard there has to be some sort of a
reward and it can't be an equal yes and
then then what you could say like so
okay so the right that that would be
roughly speaking a conservative position
and then you can take a left-wing
position that's reasonable and you can
say yes
there are hierarchies but we have to
stay awake because they can degenerate
into power-hungry tyrannies so that it's
no longer competence it's it's political
machination and game playing and tyranny
that that produce the positional the
positional differentiation so we got to
stay awake to that and so we got to
criticize the hierarchies not the fact
of hierarchy but the structure of
hierarchy so they stay honest and then
we also have to be careful because when
you do set up a hierarchy then a lot of
people collect at the bottom that's the
necessary consequence of a few people
collecting at the top and so then you
have to be concerned about those people
at the bottom and so there's a variety
of things that you would do to express
that concern is one you might want to
have a lot of hierarchies so that people
of different talents could play
different games and a complex society is
pretty good at that but you're still
gonna have people who stack up at the
bottom of all hierarchies right those
are gonna be people who are sick
mentally and physically and maybe people
who are cognitively impaired or you know
or experienced some kind of catastrophe
in their life and then you you want to
set up your system so that those people
don't suffer unduly partly because
that's bad and partly because that
destabilizes your whole society and so
you could say well that's the left's
place is to speak for the speak on
behalf of the unjustly dispossessed and
the rights position is to stabilize and
maintain functional hierarchies and
encourage competition and encourage
competition that's of benefit to the
whole yes and and to the individuals
within the competition and then the
political dialogue is a continual
discussion between the left and the
right saying well you know of this
hierarchies get a little too steep and a
little too rigid and and and and well
and that's for me that's also the the
the fundamental reason for the necessity
of free speech speak
that's the only way to discuss this it
is the only it's the only way of working
it out yeah and it is the case you need
you're going to produce hierarchies if
you're going to pursue things of value
socially going to produce hierarchies
and they're necessary and it's also I
have a giant issue with the concept that
these things are mutually exclusive that
you can't have competition and also have
a good social environment I think that's
a preposterous idea I mean one of the
things I really like about the
psychologist Jean Piaget who's who I
would say the world's foremost expert on
games is that he did a very careful
analysis of say competitive games okay
so let's take hockey or soccer it
doesn't matter same example okay you say
well because people now they they have
kids play these games and don't keep
score which of course the kids keep
score because they're not stupid like
the adults but you know well we can't
have it be competitive okay so let's
take it apart it's like well is hockey a
competitive game or a cooperative game
okay well so first of all everyone's
trying to do the same thing that's
cooperative it's not like half the
people are playing chess and another you
know a third of them brought a
basketball and two of them are boxing in
a cup well sometimes they do in hockey
boxing in a corner but everyone's trying
to do the same thing so that's
cooperative okay everyone plays their
position that's cooperative they all
follow the same rules
that's cooperative right so so there's
competition but it's nested inside a
fundamental structure of cooperation and
the cooperation is the cooperation is
the basis of the game itself let's all
arbitrarily agree that it's important to
put this black disc in the net which is
to get your aim right and then let's
cooperate within our teams to do that
because we're gonna pass and we're gonna
we're gonna pass to each other and we're
also gonna work so that each of us is a
good player but so that we all work for
the betterment of our team because we
want to win games across multiple games
so that's also cooperative and then you
want to interact with your your enemies
let's say the other team in a way that's
indicative of good sportsmanship so that
the entire league can flourish and to
think of that as competitive is
absolutely it's so there's no other way
of describing it than stupid that's what
it is
it's a it's a it's an ignorant unit
dimensional analysis it's put forward by
someone who's reflexively opposed to
anything that smacks of competition and
who isn't thinking it through at all
they they're denying the benefits of
competition and the fact that they reap
those very benefits of competition by
enjoying the products that are created
by these corporations yes what is very
hypocritical and well that's for sure
that's called a performative
contradiction it's like well I'd like to
I like to complain about left-wing
issues on my iPhone right exactly you
know it's like well yeah fair enough but
you know you should have a little
gratitude for the fact that you've got
your iPhone to complain about and those
in those organizations those
corporations are unbelievably
competitive and they fall apart almost
instantly when that competition starts
start stops being a an issue because
then there's no constraint on the
behavior of the behavior of the system
so yes and you know that the issue with
men I think with young men and this is
one of the things I've been trying to
address is that if you're fundamental
presupposition is that our culture is a
patriarchal tyranny which is an
appalling presupposition along with the
idea that the best way of looking at
history is that it it was the oppression
the continual oppression of women by men
which is also something that I regard is
absolutely reprehensible doctrine then
okay so it's a patriarchal tyranny but
but that in their defense that did exist
there has been continual oppression of
women it's just not the only thing
that's happened with Hurston women that
have been revered there's been women
that have been celebrated there's been
women that have accomplished great
things but there's been a lot of
oppression so if they concentrate
primarily on that oppression and that's
their main point of study and that's the
thing they want to talk about all the
time they kind of have a point in the
fact that if you're looking at all the
events that have ever taken place
there's a significant number of them
that have been women being oppressed
yes but school they I don't know if
there's more women who've been oppressed
than men who've been oppressed very good
point so I would say that the entire
history of I mean you look at it this
way is that we oppress ourselves
personally with our own malevolence and
stupidity and then we're all oppressed
by the kind of the crushing hand of the
social world that molds us in one way
and not in another
and then of course nature is doing her
best all the time to give birth to us
but also to kill us and take us out and
so there's this endless like there's
this endless what would you call it
vulnerability that characterizes our
existence psychologically and socially
and naturally and and I would say 150
years ago that was even more intense
than it was now you know because the
typical person in the West lived on less
than a dollar a day before 1895 and so
the way I think that we should view the
history of the world is that men and
women labored under virtually impossible
conditions for the entire bulk of human
evolution and they did their best to
cooperate and to compete but to
cooperate so that they had some modicum
some possibility of a modicum of
security and satisfaction and that
that's the right framework and then
within that of course there's power
games that are played by people who are
corrupt
yeah within that is horrible events the
first things have taken place but
there's there's a massive amount of
hypocritical thinking when you are
criticizing the actions of so many
people and talking about how many people
are complicit in these things while
you're carrying around a phone that's
made by someone who gets $1 a day I was
talking to a journalist in Slovenia who
is a lefty and not a very sophisticated
one and she was talking about the 1% and
I said well you know that if you make
more than 32 thousand dollars a year
that you're part of the 1% she said well
what do you mean I said well that's the
worldwide statistic it's like so you're
part of the 1% well she didn't first of
all she said well I don't believe that
statistic yourself but what was so
interesting was that for her that
characterization the 1% victimizers was
only relevant within the confines of her
national border right right as soon as I
said well no it's all you have to do is
expand that out a little bit and you're
the problem and not the solution then
that was that was completely untenable
for her exact she couldn't include
herself in the population of victimizers
even though you know she lives in a
western country and she's a well-paid
journalist and she's lives a very
privileged life so to speak by
historical and moral Spencer to someone
living in the Congo
anybody living anywhere in the entire
history of the human race buffets right
yeah for sure if you make $34,000 today
you absolutely are in the top 1% of
everybody who's ever load well of course
of course yes yes definitely especially
given what you can buy with it
the only reason to deny that is because
it doesn't fit what you've come into the
argument it doesn't fit your priests
predisposed notion that you have though
your idea that you're it's so rigid this
idea that you are not one of the ones
that's it's the same that's right that's
exactly carrying that iPhone with that
laptop and all these different things
that you enjoy that are created by these
corporations that you you support them
financially but yet they're the ones
that are destroying this if these are
the ones that you're rallying against
these the ones you hate against yeah
well the victim victimizer narrative
only works if you assume that you're a
victim right and as soon as you assume
that you're a victimizer well then it's
not so much fun one of the things I
wrote the foreword for the new version
of of Solzhenitsyn's Gulag Archipelago
the abridged version it came out
November 1st and I was trying to figure
out why the Russian Revolution went
wrong so rapidly because it went wrong
right from the beginning and they
Solzhenitsyn quotes this guy named I
think his name was Walter Latsis if I
remember correctly he got the lastest
part right anyways and he said when
you're interrogating a member of the
bourgeoisie to decide whether they you
know whether they constitute an enemy of
the state you don't give any credibility
to such niceties as individual guilt or
innocence all you care about is their
group and their background and their
economic status and if they're in the
wrong group the burgeois Z then that's
it that's the end of them and
Solzhenitsyn comments not just the end
of them but the end of their children
and their grandchildren as well and
latsis was eventually executed by Stalin
somebody wrote me and just told me that
after I wrote the foreword but one of
the things I figured out was this and
this is really worth thinking about man
so the intersectional claim is that you
know each person has more than one group
identity so fundamentally if you're
going to calculate their victims
then you have to calculate it across all
the different groups that they might be
victims in and so you know maybe uh oh
who knows a Native American is one form
of victim in this line of thinking but a
Native American victim is what female is
like twice the victim or however you
would calculate that mathematically it's
like okay and maybe you have maybe you
can be put into six different groups we
already talked about that a little bit
but here's the bloody rub if I put you
in six groups in one of those groups
you're a victimizer you can bloody well
bet on it and then here's the next rule
if you're a victimizer among any
possible dimension of analysis then it's
the Gulag for you and so that's the
fundamental danger of that group
identity victimized or victim narrative
is that you fragment your identity of
multiple dimensions you'll find out that
you're a victimizer and then everyone
then everyone's a criminal and then
everyone's guilty that's exactly what
happened in Russia and then you think
well wait a minute there were a bunch of
people who are really compassionate
about the poor it's like let's say just
for the sake of argument that at the
beginning of the Russian Revolution the
20% of the Communists were really
concerned about the poor maybe we could
say 50 percent just to be arbitrary
about it the other 50 percent were
jealous and resentful about anyone who
anything more than they did all right
now that you put those two groups
head-to-head in a battle for four years
and see who's standing at the end even
if you are one of those utopians who
actually cares for the dispossessed when
the revolution comes you can bloody well
be sure that your heads going to be
first on the chopping block because the
people who are motivated by hate are
going to be a lot more vicious in their
attempts to eradicate then you're going
to be what would you call it effective
in your in your attempts to save that
whole game that whole identity politics
game that is dangerous beyond belief and
it's it's predicated fundamentally on
resentment and and the desire to devolve
people back into a tribal antagonism I
think it's so important that you talk
about it this way and I think it's
really interesting when I see the
resistance do you talk about it this way
and how many people are unwilling to
look at it as this multi-level
historical sort of record you could look
and see how this played out
you can look and see what's going on
right now with these control games that
people are playing socially and that
they are enforcing certain types of
behavior in certain ways of thinking and
then trying to rein in earnings and and
rally against capitalism and support
communism and socialism and doing so in
this sort of weird trendy way without
understanding the full scope of the
historical implications when it's been
tried in the past and that it's not as
simple as like you know you know you got
this am rhein thing doing you're looking
at this world of you know capitalism
against socialism it's good people who
care about folks versus people who are
ruthless mmm-hmm it's not that the well
that isn't even how capitalism doesn't
even work like that you know that
managers are more stressed by the people
they manage than the people they manage
your stress by their managers I mean
then think about it right just all you
have to think about that for a minute
it's like you're an employee and you
have a manager and the manager is a bit
of a jerk let's say but there's 20 of
you right so there's like you're kind of
120th oppressed by the manager but now
you're the manager and you're managing
20 people and you're responsible for
them and we're assuming that you're not
a psychopath and you're probably not
because you probably wouldn't have been
able to get to be a manager if you're a
psychopath because Psychopaths generally
aren't very successful and they have to
keep moving as people figure out who
they are so the idea that like
psychopathic power is a good route to
power in a functioning organization as a
stupid theory there are some
organizations that are pathological
enough so that works but they don't last
very long either
so you're the manager and you're a
decent human being and you've got 20
people who are dependent on you and at
least two of those people are real
trouble like they're serious trouble and
they're there they're your concern all
the time and so you see this as and as
people move up the corporate hierarchies
you think well they have more and more
power it's like yeah but not really they
have more and more responsibilities and
their behavior is actually monitored
with increasing severity it's like
you're quite constrained in most high
level positions of authority in complex
organizations like you have to behave
pretty damn carefully or you're going to
get yourself in trouble very very
quickly
we'll start so today
I think that that wasn't necessarily the
case a decade ago or two decades ago it
was less the case that's less the case
today it's far easier to get called out
on things but he but even so like you
know even even 20 years ago like if you
didn't treat your customers properly you
know in and carefully reciprocally in
long-term relationships you're gonna be
a failure no and you know in in in in
any corporation that produces anything
of any value I mean the production is
one thing so you have to be competent at
the production but you have to be in
constant communication with your with
your buyers and foster those
relationships personally because there's
intense competition and if those
personal relationships aren't of high
quality then your business fails and one
of the things I really learned because I
spend a lot of time with business people
as well as academics is that business
people do a tremendous amount of
socialization compared to academics
academics can judge each other's work
more or less on the basis of its
scientific merit and so they don't have
to establish personal relationships to
the same degree but business people are
always wondering well can I trust you
can we enter into a reciprocal
relationship that's gonna be of mutual
benefit over the long run and so they're
testing people out socially all the time
and if you're not capable of
reciprocating honestly over some decades
say then you're gonna screw things up in
an absolutely horrible way it's one of
the reasons why they like to use golf
Azamat yes exactly that's a right it's
two things one you get to see how
someone handles competition you don't
get to see if they cheat you know
because people do cheat in golf you know
it's an interesting story a good friend
of mine his his dad was playing golf
with this man and his wife was there as
well and the wife saw the dad moved the
or saw this man that he's playing golf
with moved the ball and she said do not
go into business with this man do not
trust this man he's a cheater he cheated
at golf hmm and he thought it was not
that big a deal is like it's just a game
of golf no this is a big deal hmm turns
out the guy was a fucking criminal just
took a while to find out I mean he wound
up doing a lot of other things that how
you do some things is oftentimes how you
do everything
yeah well that's why people are so
interested in games yes you know because
Gacy who a person really is well games
did missus
again why I'm such an admirer of Piaget
because he knew very well that game is a
microcosm of reality yeah that's why we
like I mean you have to have an
explanation for why people like games
yeah you know I've been talking about
this a lot my lectures too is you think
well you know any game like is any
competitive game
soccer's a good example it's basically a
hunting game hey because you're you're
firing a projectile at a target okay so
the targets the goal and the projectiles
the ball but it doesn't matter is that
so you have it you have teams that are
figuring out how to hunt properly then
you think well to hunt properly you have
to put the ball in the net as many times
as you possibly can
so and so you organize yourself in a
hierarchy to facilitate that but then
that's that's not the whole story
because you tell your kids it doesn't
matter whether you win or lose it
matters how you play the game and the
kids all freaked out about that because
he doesn't know what you mean and he
says well what do you mean dad I'm
trying supposed to try to win and you
say I don't know what I mean but it's
it's still true but here's what you mean
is that if you're in a league you're not
trying to win the soccer game you're
trying to win the soccer championship
and to win the championship you have to
win a whole bunch of games and the rules
to win a whole bunch of games aren't the
same as the rules to win one game you
know like you could go flat out as the
pre-madonna and bend and bend the rules
and cut corners and exhaust everyone and
win the game and then lose the next
three because that's a stupid medium to
long term strategy or you could be like
the superstar and hog the ball all the
time and never give your teammates a
chance to develop but then you're
injured and your team is out so those
that's a stupid strategy too so that you
think well what you have to do to win
the championship is that you have to
organize your team so that the best
players lead but that everybody gets
developed and that you play the medium
to long term game in a fair way in a
fair and decent way okay so you think
well that's how you win a championship I
talked to a coach a while back and he
said one of the things he did to select
athletes was to watch what happened when
they scored a goal and if they were
celebrating on their own you know in
sort of an egotistical way then that
wasn't such a good sign but if they
scored
or touchdown or whatever it was and
their whole entire team came in and
bombed them and then like lifted them up
on their shoulders and they thought that
guy is an athlete because not only can
he put the goal put the ball in the net
but he does it in a way that benefits
the entire team and that's the person
you want around for the long run and so
then the goal isn't just to put the ball
on the goal the goal is to put the ball
in the goal the largest number of times
while simultaneously benefitting as many
as you of your fellow players as you can
well although I think that's a great
strategy I don't think that's
necessarily the meaning of it doesn't
matter if you win or lose it's how you
play the game I think what I don't think
people think of it in terms of like a
long-term strategy for championship
leagues well when they're saying it
doesn't matter whether you win or lose
it's how you play the game meaning don't
cheat yeah do your best
yeah and learn right but I think you're
from that's right well learn how to
handle failure right learn how to handle
victory we'll also learn from the
experience itself like if you make a
mistake and you you're trying your
hardest but you make an error because
someone has a counter to that yeah then
you learn from that yeah how you play
the game right and you don't think and
you win just because you got lucky
that's not as good as playing
intelligently and expanding your schist
and losing yes because the other people
are superior and then you learn from the
fact that they figured out a way to have
solutions to all the problems that you
present yes okay so so one of the things
that you're pointing out is that while
you're playing you want to be expanding
your range of skills so that you get
better at playing the next game but then
you think well even the soccer
championship isn't the whole game right
because your life is a whole series of
games of championships of different type
ideas the championships will come if you
continue to excel and get excellent yes
and also if people invite you to play
yes so there's both of those are the two
things so that's the goal right the goal
isn't to put the ball in the net the
goal is to get excellent and to be
invited to play and the mechanism is
that you put the ball in the goal and
that makes sense see that helps explain
why people find competitive sports so
unbelievably compelling because you can
be cynical about
you can say well look there's 50,000
people they are watching you know
somebody kick a spheroid object into a
net who the hell cares like and but but
that's not the issue what you're what
you are in fact doing is you're going
there to watch people develop expertise
and to learn to play reciprocally in a
noble and ethical manner and all of that
sport when it's done properly is a
direct physical incarnation of that
ethic and so it's not surprising that
that's why people get so excited when
they see an athlete do something imagine
the best thing that you can see at a
sports event is someone who does
something purely in the spirit of fair
play and in a manner that's unbelievably
excellent Ray Wayne Gretzky was very
good at that right because he was an
excellent excellent sportsman and also
unbelievably skilled and so people loved
him and that's that's perfect because he
was he was a player who played the game
like it was more important to play it
properly than to win and he was on the
top of his game at the same time right
and that's what you want to be in light
of you cut corners that's right there's
no cutting corners yeah and so that's
very cool and you see a very high order
ethic emerge out of that you want to be
the kind of player that everybody I kind
of wrote about that in 12 rules for life
when you know because part of my advice
and rule 5 was not to let your kids do
anything that makes you dislike them and
that's part of the idea there is that
you know if you're really on the side of
your children you help them develop in a
manner that makes them eminently
desirable to other children and capable
of interacting properly with adults
because then the whole world opens up to
them that's it really and then you do
that the thing that's cool about that
too is that this is what makes the
postmodern and the Marxist types so
wrong is that your best strategy for
success in life isn't the exercise of
raw power it's a really
counterproductive strategy it doesn't
even work very well for advanced animals
your best strategy is skill and
reciprocity so and there's a real high
order ethic in that that has nothing to
do so the idea that our hierarchies are
predicated on power and they're corrupt
because of that and the whole world is a
battleground between hierarchies of you
know different power hierarchies and
it's winner-take-all and
the devil take the hindmost that's just
that's completely inappropriate
psychologically there's a real situation
where you very rarely find people who
excel at competition and who have
benefited from competition who are
against competition and you very rarely
find people who have no skill in
competition at all and who have never
engaged and have shied away from their
whole life that support it and and and
believe that it's an important part of
our culture
I think people want they want to believe
and they want to support things that
reinforce their idea of how they're
living their life correctly and if if
they shy away from competition if it
makes them nervous if they've never
excelled at it if it doesn't feel right
to them if it makes them uncomfortable
they want to feel like there's some
better way and this is one of the things
that leads young sensitive kind
compassionate people towards socialism
and this concept that capitalism and any
form of competition at all ultimate is
ultimately is going to lead to a few
people hogging up all the wealth and
dominating all the people well the other
thing that's kind of sad about that is
that no matter what system you set up
that outcome you know like if you look
at the Pareto distribution so if that's
the distribution of wealth you'll find
that in every society that we know of
whether it's capitalist or socialist or
communist for that matter a small
proportion of the people have a
disproportionate amount of the resources
so so you so the other thing that I've
been trying to explain in my lectures is
that if you were really concerned about
the dispossessed and the poor you
wouldn't put hierarchical dispossession
at the feet of capitalism because it's a
way worse problem than that you know
because the Marxist types they think
well if we didn't have capitalism there
wouldn't be hierarchies and there
wouldn't be dispossession and that's
complete bloody rubbish because the
problem of hierarchy and the problem of
dispossession is way deeper than the
problem of capitalism so like if you
look at Neolithic gravesites way before
there was capitalism you see that a
small number of people are buried with
all the gold so the the the fact of
of dis dis unequal distribution of
resources that's as old as that's that's
as old as hierarchies are old it's
unbelievably old and so for the leftists
to take an anti-capitalist position and
assume that that's gonna be of benefit
to the dispossessed is an idea that's at
least 145 years out-of-date as far as
I'm concerned but we do want to
discourage tyranny we do want to keep
that we do want to keep someone from
accumulating so much wealth that they
dominate the world and have a
disproportionate effect on culture and
and do things that are detrimental that
could be in fact Ejim out for decades
and decades to come
I mean look to this day well that's why
you have a balance of powers in the
United States general because yeah well
the thing is it's not the case it should
like the fact that you can't
characterize the West as a patriarchal
tyranny doesn't mean that hierarchies
don't become tyrannical sometimes they
do and yeah and we have to be alert to
that and that's been known for a very
long time so is it fair to say that the
West has some aspects of a hierarchy
hierarchical tyranny of course of course
and that's I would say that's a
mythological truism so like the way that
that society is represented in our deep
narrative structures is always twofold
there's a wise king and a tyrannical
king and they're pitted against each
other and your job is to amplify the
wise King and keep the tyrant under
control that's the evil advisor to the
king
you know like scar in the Lion King yeah
right so he's there's always this
shadowy figure in the background that's
malevolent and psychopathic and power
obsessed that's attempting to take over
the hierarchy by by ill-gotten means
that and that that's that's that's evil
itself in some sense it's the archetype
of evil and so that has to be taken into
consideration but the problem with the
viewpoint that's so prevalent in our
society right now is that that's the
patriarchal tyranny viewpoint is that
it's only the evil king and then that's
particularly hard on young men because
if you believe that all of our
hierarchies are predicated on nothing
but arbitrary power and then about some
natural consequence of masculinity then
whenever you see anyone who's masculine
manifest anything that's associated with
competence or confid
or or or or let's say competitiveness or
or you know heaven forbid aggression
then you immediately assume that that's
nothing but a manifestation of
tyrannical power and that you discourage
it or you certainly fail to encourage it
and I think that that's a dreadful
mistake because that all that masculine
energy whether that's characteristic of
women or men because women can certainly
not offense that that's something that
should be integrated and celebrated and
the way you do that that's partly why
mechanisms like competitive sports are
so necessary is that you want to take
kids let's say boys the the more
competitive and aggressive boys just for
this example you want to take them and
you want to socialize them intensely so
that they take that aggressive
competitive impulse and they're capable
of manifesting it inside a social
structure like a game so that it's of
benefit to everyone and and you can do
that it's not a problem you know you
teach an aggressive kid that it's
beneath his dignity to bully someone
weaker so you can attach that right to
the competitiveness it's like you're a
loser you bully someone weaker than you
you're a loser
that's pathetic yes it's like it did it
it speaks right to that competitive
drive so I don't want to be a loser of
martial arts are so critical I mean
that's one of the major tenets of
martial arts you know this is a it is a
huge part of what's taught in
traditional martial arts academies as
there's a very clear way of behaving and
you're you're never supposed to do
anything remotely like right right and
you're supposed to have its reuse of
your power exactly and you're supposed
to have extreme reverence for the people
who taught you I mean your master you
literally call them a master right you
know and you know almost all martial
arts right and so that's another well so
that's another thing that's really in
that's really interesting about a
functional hierarchy is like because the
the leftist critics look at a hierarchy
and they think every position is up
looking down right but what you're
saying what you're pointing out is
knowing a functional hierarchy there's
plenty of respect going up right so it's
not only it's not just power it's like
its power it's it's it's a
authority and subordination at the same
time voluntary subordination because you
should be you should be properly
subordinate to the people who are better
at what you're doing yes and in a
functional organization that happens
naturally and the other thing that
happens too and the radical left is
never take this into account as far as
I'm concerned is that one of the things
I've learned about people who've run
successful organizations whether they're
academic or business is that they really
love mentoring young people it's a it's
an intrinsic pleasure because you know
you think well it's in for the evil
capitalists it's it's it's winner take
all and to hell with everyone else and
that's an unbelievably cynical view of
human nature it only really applies to
people who are genuinely psychopathic
and they're very rare and so most of the
people I know that have been hyper
successful are absolutely thrilled if
they can find a young person and they
don't care generally speaking about sex
or creed or color or any of that crap
they care about competence they want to
find a competent young person who's got
a lot of possibility and then open up
all sorts of doors of opportunity for
them and to see how they can help them
develop and if they can do that with 20
or 30 people then like my graduate sir
my graduate supervisor had his he's
getting old and he had his retirement
party about two years ago and about
thirty of the people that he trained it
into becoming scientists came to his
party and they talked non-stop about the
beneficial effect that that he had on
their life you know he found a lot of
them were you know they were young and
smart but didn't run real that properly
oriented in the world and he picked them
out and gave them opportunities and he
certainly did this for me has opened all
sorts of doors for me and that was a
huge source of pleasure in his life I
think maybe the primary source he had a
family as well and obviously his family
was of primary importance but in his
professional career it wasn't his name
on papers and his you know his his name
in the marquee was all these young
people whose careers he could foster its
never-ending source of satisfaction yeah
I think that's a critical aspect of
being a successful person that you have
to realize that there's a there's a
great personal benefit in helping other
people and that you feel this this is
not just like something that looks good
on paper you want
you can show some young person who's
coming up the way you're ten years ahead
of them and you could say these are the
mistakes that I made yeah I can help you
get through this and then you see them
flourish there's a great deal of
personal satisfaction there's got to be
some sort of an evolutionary benefit
that's well that's part of see that's
the thing is we are evolved for
reciprocity and really are we're not
evolved for power right this is this is
what's so deeply wrong about the damn
post modernists and the Marxist is that
that isn't what human first of all power
is not the best strategy to attain
success it's simply not it doesn't even
work for chimpanzees because the more
brute chimps you know the ones that that
rule purely as a consequence of force as
soon as they weaken to subordinates that
are reciprocally engaged so that have a
friendship tear them into pieces so I
don't care how strong you are three guys
that are like two thirds your strengths
are going to take you out so so you're
much better situated in in society and
in your life if you if you're in an
interactive network of reciprocally
beneficial relationships that works in
games but it also works in life and to
reduce that and if you're competent so
there's that there's the killer
combination hyper competence and the
capacity for genuine reciprocity that
makes you unstoppable why is there this
lack of understanding and appreciating
this nuance in people that oppose these
ideas like what are
what's the willingness to be ignorant
about all the variabilities especially
when you consider the bulk of the
research well I think some of its
justification for failure you know like
if you're not doing very well then it's
really easy to think that the game is
rigged it's also easy to be resentful
about people who seem to have more than
you have especially if you're not
thinking about it very clearly you know
and that's another thing that I've been
trying to lecture to people about is
that you should be very careful about
assuming that someone else has more than
you do I mean one of the best predictors
of whether someone has money is how old
they are so old people are richer than
young people
well obviously right because they had
their whole life to
accrue wealth it's like well who's got
it better you want to be rich and older
young and poor you know I mean you can't
buy youth with money so it isn't obvious
who's better off in a situation like
that it's in fact I think most people
who are old and rich would trade it for
young and poor fairly damn quickly well
that's why people really get angry when
they say young rich people yeah I know
that's just too much to bear yeah young
rich famous rapper like what's that
fella that there's a 17 year old little
pump about that famous 17 but you know
the fuckin high school well the funny
thing too though is that you know even
with people who have that that's sort of
let's call it good fortune you know
independent of their talent you don't
have to scratch beneath the surface very
far even in successful people's lives
until you find a pretty decent vein of
tragedy you know and so it that jealousy
of the successful is also based on a
really unit dimensional view of exactly
what constitutes success you know you
see the trappings whatever they might be
let's say it's a yacht and and more
money than you know what to do with and
you assume well that's gonna put that
person at the pinnacle of a satisfying
life but there's no shortage of
dreadfully unhappy and addicted
celebrities and it isn't obvious always
that more money is good for people you
know I mean you say oh that's a problem
I'd like to have it's like look fair
enough I mean there are worse problems
but celebrity and fame and fortune are
also not that easy to deal with and they
come with their own pitfalls plus
there's lots of things they don't
protect you against you know people
still get divorced and they still get
sick and they still die and their
parents still get Alzheimer's and all of
that like the the fundamental tragic
elements of life are still in place one
of the interesting things about people
that are jealous of other people that
are extremely successful is that you're
missing one of the core lessons of
competition one of the core lessons of
competition is to be inspired by those
are more successful and not to try to
chip them down and take away their
accomplishments because they don't make
you feel good
you
the people that are piss-poor
competition are always the ones that are
trying to diminish the accomplishments
of those who are extremely successful
you see this in sports fans mmm if you
see a loser fat sports fan talking about
what a piece-of-shit LeBron James is
because he dropped the ball or a missed
a shot like this the extreme reaction
that they could have to someone who's
extraordinarily successful is almost
always in direct proportion to how much
more failure they are in their own life
and that's one of the reasons why in
contrast it looks so ridiculous
yeah well that's part of the danger I
would say that's part of the danger of
the entire identity politics movement is
that you know is that that reasonable
care for the dispossessed which we
already talked about is easily
contaminated by hatred and resentment
for people who are not only successful
but who are the most annoying person
who's successful is the person who
deserves it not the person who doesn't
deserve it because you can right the
person who doesn't deserve at all right
the lottery win hmm you can say oh yeah
well you know he just got his money
exactly but then you see the person
who's broken themselves in half and you
know come out of a really pathological
background and is being successful and
you're like you're uselessly wasting
your life away that's the sort of person
that you really don't like because they
cast you in a very dim light so this is
where competition is so important
because the person that has a background
in competition has been involved in
competition sees a person who's busted
their ass and and become something
really extraordinary and it's incredibly
inspirational and you look to those
people and you want to read their
biographies and you want to watch
documentaries on them because it
literally gives you fuel yep whereas the
person you who shy away from competition
is afraid of their own insecurities and
failures and really has never tested
themselves those are the ones that find
these people extremely distasteful
because when they put themselves in
comparison to these incredible people
they they come up show well every ideal
it's races every ideal is a judge yes
and so what's what's the answer to that
no ideals
that's a stupid that's a stupid
suggestion no it certainly doesn't
because then it leaves people without
any meaning in their life you know so
well I think it speaks to what you were
talking about earlier that we need
diversity that we need adversity we need
difficult do we need struggle you need
you need a weight to carry and if you
don't have any of this you do not get
your character tested you do not advance
in your own perception of who you are in
this world and how you how you engage
with all the other people around you you
don't call out what's best in you yes
and then and then you can't live without
that you need that you need that and so
and the trick seems to be that voluntary
acceptance of the adversity see that's
one of the things that I think is core
to the mythos of Christianity because
there's an idea that you should pick up
your cross and stumble uphill and that's
really what that means is that you you
know you set your you set your eyes on
some high level vision the City of God
on the hill whatever that happens to be
you know and then you take the burden
whatever burden you're capable of
lifting which is obviously going to be a
burden of suffering at least to some
degree and you carry that voluntarily
that's the trick is that and then you
say well you need a purpose in your life
it's like well look there's a lot of
problems around you in the world you
have some problems some problems even
that bother you right personally they
seem to call out to you those problems
maybe those are your problems those are
the problems you should solve and those
I think are the call to adventure it's
like there's a problem it bugs me okay
do something about it that is your
problem there's a certain amount that
you could tolerate I mean I think it's
like weight training there's a certain
amount where it becomes detrimental yeah
where you've over trained your body's
breaking down there's a certain amount
of problems you have in your life that
are extremely beneficial yeah because
through going through these problems
sorting them out you you build your
spirit you you build your character and
if you don't accomplish anything and you
never encounter any problems you you are
this gelatinous soft atrophied soul and
you don't have the intestinal fortitude
or the spirit or the human potential has
not been developed to the point where
you can overcome adversity the only way
to overcome adversity just to face it so
that that optimum that you were talking
about so I've really been interested in
the neurophysiology of the of the sense
of meaning because role through a
physiology yes well because the meaning
the feeling of meaning is an instinct
right it's not a thought
not a secondary consequence of rational
processes it's way deeper than that it's
something that drives rationality itself
so now you was just very amongst people
definitely yeah but it varies in this
way as far as I can tell so that so
imagine as you said that there's an
optimal load right you exceed that and
to your detriment yeah and you see that
in the weight room you pull a muscle you
hurt or you'll hurt yourself
you can injure yourself very badly right
you can take yourself out for the count
but and then if you if you work too
little while then there's no gain in it
you have to find that thin edge where
you're competent at what you're doing
but you're pushing yourself that's gonna
be where meaning lies that's what
meaning tells people it says you're on
the edge where you're competent and and
out of undue danger but pushing yourself
enough so that you're continually
developing that's the instinct of
meaning and that looks to me like it's a
consequence of the interaction between
the right and the left hemispheres and a
the negative emotion Systems anxiety and
pain that regulate you that protect you
from harm and the exploratory and play
systems that drive you forward you want
the exploratory and play systems to
drive you forward but then they're
regulated by these negative emotions so
you don't hurt yourself and if you get
that optimally right then that's the
maximal that's the point of maximal
challenge and that makes you really
alert because your positive emotion is
functioning that's what's driving you
forward this is worth doing and your
negative emotions are alert to saying
yeah but be awake and be careful and you
know what that's like in the weight room
if you know you're lifting something
that's at the edge of your ability
you've got a spotter you want to push
and you can barely do it and you want to
make sure that you're not gonna like
pull your arm down and rip the hell out
of your muscle but you're right on that
edge and that's the place of maximal
gain and that sense of meaning that's
what puts you on the border between
chaos and order right because too much
order means you're just practicing what
you already know and then you then you
stall to fly and stagnate and too much
chaos means you better look out because
you're gonna hurt yourself you're
pushing yourself beyond your limits you
stay right on that edge that's where
there's maximal meaning and then you and
wired for that edges just push it to
push it yeah now one of the things I
recommend
young people especially true for people
in their 20s is that you should push
yourself beyond your limits of Tolerance
in your 20s to find out where it is how
much can you work how discipline can you
become like can you work 12 hours a day
can you work eight hours a day can you
work three hours a day like flat out
where's your limit and how much how much
work can you do and how much
socialization you should find out push
yourself past and then back off to that
point where it's optimally sustainable
that's what a lot of people do isn't it
I mean they party too much when they're
in their 20s they make a lot of mistakes
what it's it's it's what they're doing
and I would say in sort of a haphazard
way right because there's that instinct
to go out there and do more right and
but it's did unregulated and it's not
it's not as self-conscious as it might
be it's good to know that there's it's
good to think about that as a goal it's
like you're trying to discover what your
limitations are when you're when you're
in your 20s so that you can hit that
edge so that you can sustain yourself
across the decades and so yeah because
you don't you don't want to you don't
want to have too much fun all right too
much fun takes you out you don't want to
be the oldest guy at the disco you know
it's not it's not fun being the 40 year
old at the singles bar precisely so you
want to make sure that what you're doing
is age-appropriate and you want to push
yourself in every direction that you can
but you should be doing that with an aim
in mind just like you're trying to make
yourself into a better and more
competent person and so some discipline
along with the fun is a good idea so to
take care of yourself and the people
around you that's a one of the things I
recommended to people and I've had quite
a few people actually tell me that
they've done this interestingly enough I
said well one thing you could aim at if
you had any sense when you were young is
to be the most worth you could be the
most reliable person at your father's
funeral and so I think that's a good
challenge and I had a bunch of people
come up to me in this last tour and tell
me that that's exactly what they did
these were often young guys you know
like before 20 said my dad died suddenly
or you know he died after years he'll
'no sand it was just taking me out and
no wonder you know he said they said i
was listening to your lectures you said
you want to be the most reliable person
at the funeral because everyone else is
grieving and what the hell else are you
going to do he said that's what they
tried to do and that got him through it
so no that's part of that picking up
that load as far as i'm concerned
get a little self-respect out of that
too in a real sense right because you
know you're this sort of sad suffering
creature that's capable of a fair bit of
malevolence but if you find out that you
can carry a heavy load and take care of
yourself and have a little left over for
some other people then you can wake up
at 3 in the morning and think well man I
could be worse and this is not a
political perspective this is a positive
constructive way of looking at how to
navigate the world but when you break
down these sort of behavior types
whether it's the people that generally
support socialism or socialist ideas or
there are anti competition versus people
that are Pro pushing yourself they fall
into these right wing left wing sort of
paradigms in this really weird way that
I mean especially there I think that's
especially true on the radical ends but
I think you get that on the radical
right too because you should people who
are who are collectivist in their
fundamental orientation you know and
they're they're trying to take undue
credit for who their racial ancestors
were or they're okay but what I would
say with the with the political issue is
that I think that you can build decent
responsible people who are on the middle
right of the spectrum and the middle
left you know because I think that you
can have left-wing political beliefs
that are genuinely aimed at aid to the
dispossessed without being resentful of
the hierarchies and without
contaminating it with jealousy for the
successful it's hard right you have to
because when I worked for the NDP when I
was a kid when that was the Socialist
Party in Canada the leaders some of the
leaders were people like that like a lot
of the low-level party functionary types
they were the activist types that you
still see today and they're mostly
resentful I didn't like them at all but
some of the leaders were genuinely
genuine advocates for the working class
you know and they they had their flaws
obviously but but there they put their
money where their mouth was and they
were trying to ensure that the
hierarchies were open to advancement for
for let's say the common person so to
speak the person who stacked up at the
bottom or for their children which might
even be more important you know so that
the hierarchies remain open to genuine
competition
based on competence which would be a
perfectly reasonable thing for the left
to insist on right is that
let's bloody well make sure that it's a
fair game and so that people don't get
locked out of movement forward because
of arbitrary positions of power right
and that's that's that's a reasonable
that's a reasonable part of the
discussion so I think if you build
better people you can build better
people on the left and on the right and
people that are going to appreciate that
rules to the game are better for
everyone they're better for the people
that win they're better for the people
that are coming up they're better for
every yes if you absolutely have real
structure and real rules yes and that
you're better off being a guy like Wayne
Gretzky yes better off being a guy who's
respected it plays the game correctly
and just does his best and really truly
become a champion and loved by all
because of it you're better off in every
way right right and that's the most
state the other thing that's so cool
about that so imagine this this is the
antidote to moral relativism okay so the
first thing is is that there are real
problems and and hierarchical
organizations can offer real solutions
socially and personally so you can
confront the problems courageously and
you can solve them so that's real and
ameliorate suffering and limits
malevolence and so there's nothing
morally relative about that the second
is that sense of meaning that we
discussed that's not some philosophical
second-order consequence of thinking
it's way deeper than that that sense of
meaning tells you when you're Vygotsky
Russian psychologist called that the
zone of proximal development which I
believe is where the phrase the zone
came from and so in the zone of proximal
development this is what adults do with
children little kids that are learning
to talk adults automatically talk to
little children who are learning to talk
at a level that slightly exceeds their
current vocabulary they do that without
even knowing it and that puts those kids
in the zone right because if you just
talk baby talk to kids then all they
learn is baby talk and if you just talk
like an adult then they don't understand
a word you're saying
so you'll find this happy medium in
between where the kid mostly understands
what you're talking about and that
you're pulling them forward so that puts
them in the zone that's a meaningful
zone and so you can feel the operation
of that zone in your own life that's
what the Daoists are on about because
they say well you Dow is the way right
and that's the pathway between chaos and
order
that's meaning and you can feel that in
your life when you're deeply engaged in
something like we have deeply engaging
conversations okay which is part of the
reason that we keep having them and I
think why they're popular and we're not
paying attention to how the clock is
ticking or how time is flowing or even
to the fact that we're doing what we're
doing we're just having a conversation
and it's meaningful it's engaged it
keeps our eyes focused and our senses
concentrated on what's happening and the
reason for that is that there's enough
information flowing between us so that
we're being slightly transformed as a
consequence of the discussion right so
we're both comfortable we trust each
other
we trust that the conversation is aimed
at something that's of mutual benefit we
had trust each other to tell the truth
to the degree that we're capable of
doing that and then when you engage in
this exchange of information and to the
degree that it's breaking you down a
little bit and building you up in a
different way that's a little death and
rebirth there's constant little deaths
and rebirths in a meaningful
conversation then that keeps you alive
and functioning and that that focus is
like that that speaks to you so deeply
that that focus happens without any
consciousness and that's meaning and
that's that line between chaos and order
and that's real that has nothing it's
it's a it's and I would say here's
another thing that's cool so that line
between chaos and order that's the same
thing that's happening when you're
playing a game properly right because
you're in the game and you're you're
exercising your skill but you're pushing
it but you're pushing it in a way that's
also a benefit to your teammates and to
the progression of the game as such and
to being a better general player you're
doing all that at the same time and
you're evolved with enough natural
intelligence so that the sum total
output of your nervous system says to
you you're in the right place at the
right time doing the right thing and
that's what makes your life meaningful
and that's real and I think it's more
real than anything else I think it's
more real than suffering I think it's
more real than malevolence because it's
the antidote to both of those and so the
whole moral route moral relativism issue
for me as a non-starter it's just wrong
there's lots of ways of interpreting the
world but there aren't very many ways of
interpreting it optimally
and you can feel when you're doing that
it makes you stronger and then the
people that come to me after my talks
and say well you know I've been putting
my life together I've developed a vision
I've been trying to be more responsible
I've been trying to be more honest and
put my relationships together they're
all sparkly eyed because of this or
crying sometimes because it's really had
an impact out the money on them at a
deep level they think oh wow this
actually works it's like yeah it
actually works it's real it's real and I
would say as well that that's associated
with the idea of the deep Western idea
of the logos which is meaning in action
and speech so you know if we have a
conversation that's meaningful then
that's a manifestation of the spirit of
the logos and that's the thing that
destroys and and and recreates at the
same time because you learn something it
destroys something it destroys a little
presupposition that you had that was
erroneous and replaces it with something
that's healthier and every time you have
a meaningful conversation that happens
it's like a little tweak now it wasn't
quite right here click that moves and
something new takes its place so and
that's a little death and rebirth
instead of the catastrophic death and
rebirth that you might have to have if
you weren't paying attention so that's
all tied together it's all tied together
with that phenomena of meaning and
that's the same as the adoption of
responsibility that all ties together so
not so nicely they have a concept of
meaning like what is important that it's
so it's so huge to people but so
fleeting it's so difficult to like what
is meaning well you know there's a
simple ones right like family and loved
ones and companionship and community and
finding something that you enjoy doing
that you know you can do that it seems
bigger than you or bigger than yourself
but but meaning like the meaning of life
what is meaning and this it's one of the
things that gives people so much
existential angst and I think is the
cause of a lot of despair because
there's while you can question it yes
but the thing is is that that's one of
the dangers of rationality is that see
the Egyptians associated the Catholics
did this to some degree too they
associated ration rationality with a
proclivity to malevolence partly because
rationality tends to fall in love with
its own productions intelligence has
this like inbuilt arrogance
and the Egyptians in particular were
really insightful they tried to replace
the idea of intelligence as the highest
virtue with the idea of attention as the
highest virtue this is something eldest
Huxley knew he wrote a book called
island island was an island that was
populated by had a lot of birds on it
and the birds could talk and all they
did was say pay attention to remind
everybody on the island to pay attention
all the time but you you can undermine
your sense of meaning and you can
question it but the best thing to do is
to actually pay attention to when it
manifests itself because it's a it's a
phenomenon like like color or like or
like love or like beauty it exists it
isn't something you create it's
something that you discover and you can
discover it you just have to watch like
you're ignorant about yourself you think
okay well I'm gonna I told my clinical
clients to do this and my student says
watch yourself for two weeks just watch
like you don't know who you are
and notice when you're doing something
that you're engaged in it's like you'll
see it maybe it's only ten minutes
because your life is pretty out of
balance but you'll see that oh man I was
engaged in something there for ten
minutes it's like why what was what did
you do that was right that engaged you
you were in the right place at the right
time doing the right thing for a few
minutes what was it what were the
preconditions there's this line in the
New Testament Christ says the kingdom of
God is spread across the earth but men
do not see it and that's what it refers
to is that you you you wander into
paradise now and then when you're
engaged and you're deeply engaged in
something but you don't notice it you
don't think oh look I'm in the right
place and everything's working out right
now it means I've got it right somehow
and then I need to practice being there
more and more and more which is well
that's the appropriate thing to try to
practice and that's to make that's to
come to some negotiated what would you
call it it's do it it's to come to a
negotiation with that intrinsic sense of
meaning and to realize it as a fact
rather than then just as an opinion or
or something that's secondary because
it's no eyein concept for people though
to be so aware of who they are and what
they're doing that they could recreate
that hmm so when they do feel that
feeling of meaning that they could
figure out a way to get
back in tennis Dayton what were all the
extenuating circumstances and where
where's my head at what caused me to
have this this feeling like things were
right yes well it's like someone gives
you a gift and you think well I'd like
that gift again it's like yeah well you
have to figure out what it was that you
did to deserve it so to speak and yeah I
know it requires a fair bit of it
requires a fair bit of careful
reflection but it also requires that
ignorance is you have to think well I
don't know who I am I'm gonna find some
things meaningful what are they they
might not even be things you want to
find meaningful they might be things
that you might even be ashamed of you
know because sometimes people are
interested in things that they don't
think that they should be interested in
like maybe you'll have a guy who was who
was this kind of a cliche but who was
you know socialized to be real tough guy
and he finds out that he's kind of
interested in art or aesthetics it's
like while he's ashamed of that because
maybe it's too feminine or whatever well
it doesn't matter because that's
actually speaking that that's actually
something that's speaking to him from
the core of his genuine being he's gonna
have to pursue that or you might find
you know that someone who's really
agreeable and kind of a pushover stands
up to someone just once at work says
what they really think and then they
realize afterwards wow you know that was
exactly right then they think oh my god
you know I've decided when I was a
little kid maybe they had a harsh father
and they decided when they were before
I'm never gonna be angry in my whole
life there's something wrong with
aggression so they've gone out of their
way their whole life to be free of
conflict then they find out the one day
they stand up for themselves that that
whole domain that they'd parsed off as
inappropriate is actually contains
exactly what they need to put themselves
together or do you find what you need
where you least want to look that's the
old alchemical dictum in sterk wiliness
infinite or right i want to talk to you
about activists because it's something
that you brought up earlier saying that
you you you know you find them
unappealing like I want to know what you
think the motivation of a lot of these
like particularly radical left-wing
activists that want to shut down
lectures and screen people down and you
know in these auditoriums what do you
think the motivation of these people is
and what do you what do you think is the
root
of it well I think that it's a quick
route to moral virtue you know like it's
actually really hard to put yourself
together and you have to do that in ways
that you can't Trump it you know because
most of the things that are wrong with
you are kind of low what would you call
it second-rate and embarrassing your all
your stupid little habits and your
proclivity to procrastinate and all the
things that your minorly ashamed of and
then you have to work on those slowly
because you the probability that you're
gonna be able to fix them quickly is it
slow and you can't really brag about it
because it's so embarrassing just to
admit that they exist to begin with it
you can hardly brag about it and it's
sort of painstaking private work and you
you don't get a lot of social you don't
get a lot of quick social status for it
it's effortful embarrassing humbling and
difficult and then you can do something
like be an activist and you get all that
public acclaim for being on the good
side with no effort whatsoever and so
it's a yes do you think that there's any
motivation at all to try to make the
world a better place yes I think your
sons that's part of it sure well you
think its flavored by this desire to
broadcast your virtue yes because it's
very difficult to make the world a
better place you know that's the thing
is no I mean young people have a
messianic impulse that's another thing
that was documented by Piaget that
there's a stage you know and late
adolescence where you want to make the
world a better place and I would say
that's probably part of the impulse to
you know establish a permanent
relationship and have a family and and
and take care of people you know and and
to take on some of the burden of life
it's it's the psychological precursor to
that and it's reasonable for smart young
people to be concerned about broader
philosophical issues if they tilt in
that direction as well but it's all too
easy for that to be pathologized into
resentment for for those who seem to
have more unfairly and also to take the
easy route out and there
aren't easy roots there are only
difficult routes to doing useful things
and it's better just to do that and then
so I think that there's some impulse to
you know there's some wish that things
could be less unfair and that fewer
people could suffer but it's kind of a
low-level virtue that that reflects of
compassion you know I I'm not saying
it's what it's without merit because
it's the that compassion is the basis
for the ability to take care of of
people who are ill and and an infant
woman so for this low level like where's
that it's not thought through mmm
things are complicated it's hard to it's
hard to make complicated systems work
better and it's really make them work
worse what about activists that want to
shut down certain speakers like someone
who's in my opinion fairly innocuous in
terms of the net like here's one
Christina Hoff Sommers yes I don't see a
good argument for shutting her down
she's so polite she's a feminist she's
well-read yep she's a really nice person
yeah Janis fit Mancos like that too in
the Canada this sort of person doesn't
make sense that people would shout her
down yet they do oh yes a horrible
things about her they mischaracterize
her in a really brutal way that it
completely invalidates their argument or
their opposition to her to anyone is
paying attention to what she said oh
well a lot of it a lot of it is a lot of
it is also just immature acting out yes
you know and there's an arrogance
tolerated no very strange way yeah it is
it is it is well yeah it's it's it's
part of our doubt I suppose about
Authority and about its and our
willingness to assume that all authority
is contaminated by power it's this
notion heckling - it's almost like like
you're if you're doing a play you know
or a musical or you're singing a song
someone just decide to start screaming
out well that person is an asshole but
if you're espousing an opinion yeah and
that person decides to scream out and
they do so under the guise of moral
virtue yeah yeah undeserved access to
power
yes you know and it's no wonder that the
radical
leftists in particular concentrate on
power everything's about power well then
it's okay if they use power as part of
their means of expression it's like well
you're just playing power games it's
perfectly reasonable even appropriate
for me to play power games because you
know I'm oppressed compared to you if
everything's power then everybody gets
to yell right and there's no one of the
things I realized about about recently
as well as that there isn't a debate
about free speech exactly not the way
that we think about it you know you know
because the there's the classical
defense of free speech so the classical
defense of free speech is that it's
better for both of us if we're able to
exchange our opinions because I have the
opportunity to learn from you and you
have the learner tunity to learn from me
and you have the opportunity to learn
from your own mistakes and social
feedback and so do i and negotiation
beats war okay so that's kind of the
classical now but that's predicated on
some assumptions and those are you're an
autonomous being you're capable of
formulating an opinion that that's
actually unique to you and that in
dialogue we can mutually modify each
other's unique opinions in a way that
produces a mutually harmonious and
beneficial outcome that's all the
predicates well that the people who are
opposed to free speech you see it's not
that they're trying to shut down people
whose opinions are different than theirs
exactly it's that they're opposed to the
idea that free speech exists it's a way
deeper problem because at the bottom of
the postmodernist mess is the following
assumption is that well there's no
there's no one way of interacting with
the world that's preferable to any other
way and so what people do is organize
themselves into hierarchies of power and
then struggle for dominance within the
hierarchies and then the hierarchy
struggle between each other so it's a
landscape of warring hierarchies that's
all it is and you think that you're a
person and that you have an opinion but
you're not you're just the mouthpiece of
your privileged hierarchy and so am i
and so and it's in commensurate if we're
from different hierarchies there
you talking to a me that could come to
an agreement there's just you acting as
a mouthpiece for your power and me
acting as a mouthpiece for my power and
so since I'm part of my group and I want
to win because it's all about power then
why the hell would I ever want you to
talk it's not like I have anything to
learn from you or even that learning is
possible or even that there are two
people having a discussion there's
nothing but the mouthpiece of power
there's two mouthpieces of power warring
and so that why should I listen to you
I'll just shut you down because then I
win hmm and so this this free speech
debate isn't about who's whose opinions
should be allowed within you know an
overarching framework where free
speeches is a real thing it's a debate
about whether there's such a thing as
free speech at all the the radical
postmodernist types they deny even that
there's such a thing as an autonomous
individual in any way you're just you're
just the Nexus of economic forces
economic and social forces you're
entirely socially constructed there's no
you these are deep criticisms like I've
made this case before that the
postmodern types although they have to
ally themselves with the Marxists for
for reasons that we don't have to go
into they are going after things that
are so fundamental you can't believe it
they don't there is no autonomous
individual in the postmodern world
that's a that's a modernist or an
Enlightenment viewpoint that's or a
Christian viewpoint or a judeo-christian
viewpoint or maybe an Abrahamic religion
viewpoint who the hell knows it might be
that that that deep your the nexus of
sociological forces there's no
integrated self you don't have ideas or
opinions and there's no dialogue between
us that doesn't exist there's your group
your identity your struggle for power
and that's all this is your
interpretation no this is this is the
fundamental essence of post-modernism
especially it's especially true in the
format is posed by Derrida and Foucault
Foucault everything's about power
everything's about power and Derrida was
definitely that's why he criticized the
idea of logo centrism
logos is that ability of the individual
to engage in dialogue route for dialogue
is logos or logic that's all criticized
that's all gone the identity politics
players the serious the people who are
serious about this philosophically they
don't believe in the idea of the
autonomous individual that's gone so
it's not like they're playing a game
within you know you think well this is a
game we're all playing a game where we
agree on some things and we're just
disagreeing about the details it's like
oh no no no no do you don't want to make
that mistake this this critique is way
way deeper than that which is why
Derrida was opposed to the idea of logo
centrism he didn't believe in the idea
of an autonomous individual that didn't
exist that's just a fiction set up by
those who have used the idea of the
autonomous individual to advance their
power manoeuvring within the confines of
the colonialist
the colonialist West now and what's the
rationalization for that perspective is
this to enhance their argument to try to
push forth their ideas in a less less
debatable way like what why I think the
motivation is hatred for competence
hatred for competence I truly believe
that I've been trying to go down like go
down as deep as I could to find out why
the layers I think it's Cain and Abel
Wow
I really believe that I think that
because I can't understand the
motivation otherwise it's like well why
are you tearing these things down well
it's on the basis you know we have
sympathy for the oppressed it's like
well well why like we're in you're
wearing your conceptualization does that
idea of sympathy for the oppressed come
from you don't even have the idea of the
individual in your conceptualization
it's like that's just uh I don't I don't
I don't buy any of that
I think it's Cain and Abel all the way
down do you think that when you're
talking about the Scandinavian model
where they've made it incredibly equal
and through this massive effort to take
away any opportunity or to to rather
open up every possible opportunity for
women
men also have and you seen these these
differences in genders actually
accentuate because of this do you think
that maybe what we're seeing also even
in terms of the post modernists and the
radical leftist versus people on the
right this same sort of competition
aspect of it is also problematic because
it's one of the reasons why there's so
much debate in the first place and that
if we if we had maybe more middle ground
and more opportunity there would be less
of an argument there would be less of a
reason to have these these these extreme
polar opposites that maybe embracing of
more like there's certain socialist
aspects of our society that we just
accept right like you know Fire
Department right yeah
like a universal provision of
infrastructure yes yeah that's a good
one schools should be I think more
emphasized in that direction but it
gives towards privatize schools for
people with higher incomes which gets
away more from socialism and sort of
reinforces capitalism more right but I
think things like maybe perhaps even
universal basic income or certainly
universal health care with you got you
what you guys have in Canada which we
don't have here and definitely higher
education making higher education far
more accessible and far less costly stop
subsidizing these student loans stop
making student loans something that you
can never escape well I think this is
part of the eternal debate right because
we've already talked about the utility
of hierarchies and the necessity of
putting those who can in charge but the
consequence of that which is an unequal
distribution of both talent and
resources well you don't want that to
get so steep that people stack up at the
bottom because your society starts to
destabilize and so you have to have a
continual discussion between the left
and the right to see how you stop the
bottom from suffering yeah from from
hitting zero yeah cuz zero is not good
you can't play when you hit zero and
that's not good and so I don't think
there is a universal solution to that
problem because the problem keeps
manifesting
think about it as an eternal problem
here here's the problem there's a set of
problems that'll never go away
now what the problems are change but the
fact that there are problems never go
away
okay the fact that you have to produce
hierarchies to solve those problems
never goes away
the fact that the hierarchies
dispossessed never goes away but the
detail shift all the time and so the
whole reason that you need the political
discussion is to take a look at the
particulars of the hierarchies and the
particulars of the dispossession and say
okay well now we need to shim it up here
and now we need to shim it up here and
now we need to adjust this and now we
need to adjust this because you can't
come up with a final solution to those
problems I think that's partly why you
have consciousness itself you know
because if you could automate the
solution imagine there was a permanent
solution well there's a permanent
solution to breathing you have a part of
your brain that just breathes you don't
think about it you don't adjust it while
you do a bit when you're talking but you
get my point it's like problem taken
care of well there's other problems that
are so fluid like their eternal problems
but they're so fluid in their detail
that you need awareness and linguistic
capacity to address them and I would say
the problem of hierarchy and
dispossession fit exactly into that
category
is that we're gonna organize ourselves
hierarchically because talent is
unequally distributed it doesn't matter
like as soon as you you invent
basketball and instantly you know
there's one percent of the population
who are super great at basketball it
doesn't matter as soon as you set up an
arbitrary value structure you get a
hierarchy then there's the whole slums
at the bottom that can't put a ball in
the hoop to save their lives and and
that's an eternal problem that's why it
says in the New Testament that the poor
will be with us always a very
pessimistic and there's two lines like
that one is to those who have everything
more will be given and from those who
have nothing everything will be taken
that's a rough line and the second is
the poor will be with us always okay so
why well it's a reflection of what we
just described is that you're going to
get hierarchical structures and they're
going to dis possess okay so then what
we want to do is we want to use mercy
say justice gives you what you deserve
so that's on the competitive end you get
what you deserve but there's this old
idea an old religious idea that's a good
idea
God rules with two ends right hand is
justice and the left hand is mercy
justice means you get what you deserve
but the world can't survive that way
because people are flawed and make
mistakes and if you only got exactly
what you deserved it would be a hell of
a world right because you'd be punished
for every single mistake you make you
know you'd be held accountable in a way
that would be unbearable so that has to
be tempered with mercy and and so maybe
the left is the is the end of the
distribution that tempers with mercy
when it's functioning properly but it
can degenerate into that cane like
resentment of the of the successful and
that's a danger on the right you have
the opposite danger which is well you
know you advance because of your
competence but then that can ossify and
so you want to hang on to that that
position even though you're no your
competence no longer justifies it you
start to use the advantages of your
position to accrue benefits for yourself
that you did not earn and that's the
proclivity of the of the hierarchy to
become blind and tyrannical and that's a
that's an eternal problem the the
Egyptians had a God for that Osiris
Osiris was the god of hierarchies and he
was always threatened by Seth who is his
evil brother and his evil brother was
always conspiring to overcome him and
that's the problem with hierarchies is
that they tilt towards tyranny and the
reasonable left says that watch the
hierarchies because they tilt towards
tyranny it's like yes it's true but that
doesn't mean that the idea of hierarchy
itself is flawed and that doesn't mean
that all hierarchies are tyrannical
that's going way too far do you think
that the Scandinavian model that has
revealed that when you do make things
more equal you will find that people
generally tend to gravitate more towards
traditional gender roles that does this
do you think that this makes people
happier has it been observed that this
is a happier result
that's a good question the the indices
of life satisfaction are pretty high in
Scandinavia but I don't know if anybody
has done an analysis that would indicate
whether the the sexual sorting is a
contributor to that oh that's a good
question I mean the general idea has
been that the Scandinavians are happier
because their societies are more
egalitarian but but they're not more
egalitarian in the sense that men and
women are also more different so men and
women are more different but the
opportunities are more egalitarian yeah
yeah so but so then but and then the
societies are more are more satisfied
but it's tough eh cuz there's other
variables because the Scandinavian
countries are relatively homogenous
right and more homogeneous societies
tend to be more peaceful and happier not
not more diverse societies and there are
also small countries so they're somewhat
easier to govern right and they tend to
be wealthy so those so it'd be hard to
parse out all those contributors right
to figure out what it is that's making
the Scandinavians relatively content
this is almost like a super tribe versus
a country yeah yeah right well and those
those sorts of societies in some sense
are easier to manage so there any
benefit to this this model that we could
perhaps bring to the United States or to
Canada and maybe mitigate some of the
issues that we have between the right
and the left like maybe there's some
sort of a compromise that'll lead to
less less debate and dispute well I
think that you guys in the States are
doing real well actually personally I
mean you know your your system of checks
and balances seems to work out pretty
well there's a fair bit of let's say
left domination right now of the
mainstream media I think that's a
reasonable claim and also of academia
and of the intelligentsia but the
political system is skewed pretty hard
to the Republican end of things at the
moment and so that's not a bad balance
and then in the last election I mean
maybe you could make a case perhaps that
things had tilted a little too
far to the Republican side but that they
had got balanced out because the
Democrats took the house again and it
seems like they were more moderate
Democrats that seems to be the
scuttlebutt so you know it isn't obvious
to me that your system isn't functioning
well I think that one of the things
that's happening that's making things
look more contentious than they are is
that the mainstream media is under such
assault by the up-and-coming media forms
including people like you that as their
financial models deteriorate and as
their journalistic standards take a hit
and as they lose their fact checkers and
their time to be careful with the
stories they concentrate more on
exaggerating the extremes to attract
attention and so you know there was an
article published in The Atlantic
Monthly about a month ago showing that
didn't it depends now you calculate
these things but that the radical
leftists and the radical right-wingers
are only about 5% of the population on
each side and that the vast majority of
Americans consider themselves something
approximating the relatively silent
majority and so I don't think that
things are polarized as badly as they
seem and it is also the case right now
that if you poll people and ask them
about the conditions of their life in
the United States they tend to say that
they're doing quite well but that other
people aren't and so I think maybe I
don't know this for sure but but I think
maybe that the technological pressure
that's being put on the mainstream media
is driving extreme political views as a
means of gathering the attention of a
shrinking market share that's that's a
very interesting take on and I wonder
how detrimental that is to us as a whole
because we are constantly dealing with
this clickbait nonsense headline you
know and everything everything is a
dispute everything is a war it's
nerve-racking yes you know I mean I
noticed this years ago cuz I really
stopped watching the news Oh 25 years
ago although I've been heavily involved
in the last two years because I noticed
that most of what passed for news wasn't
because my sense was well if it isn't
important in a month
if it isn't important a month from now
it was never important and almost
everything that's news is like important
right now
yeah and so I tried to stay away from
that it was better for my peace of mind
and I often recommended to my clinical
clients who were depressed and anxious
that they shield themselves from the
news as much as possible but now there's
the news is everywhere right it's
everywhere it's Twitter its Facebook its
YouTube it's like we're just inundated
by it
it's like CNN on steroids its 24-hour
news cycle and it's produced by everyone
whether they're informed or not and it's
really high emotion and I think that
that is making things look a lot worse
to us than they actually are I think
it's also similar to what we were
talking about earlier when it comes to
reading comments on Instagram or Twitter
I just think there's just an amount of
data
yeah that's incomprehensible I don't
think you can handle it I don't think
you navigate it you can't navigate that
many relationships I mean these are the
reason why we have this Dunbar's number
ahead we if you're dealing with hundreds
of thousands of people in your case a
million followers that are constantly
interacting with you it's gonna fucking
drive you mad yeah well you don't even
know what to do with it no like because
I don't even know what my ethical
obligation is to my writer followers you
know because like there's a million
people follow you can't react to all of
them no yeah well certainly I know one
limitation which is that having it
drives me insane is probably not a good
outcome for anyone except for those who
hope that I would fall crawl this is my
rock let's say this is a personal thing
right because they're responding and
they're it's dimensions are to you
personally but in a lesser way perhaps
but it's still also overwhelming is just
a sheer amount of information that's
available constantly about everything
there's there's a million stories every
day about every single thing that's
going on you I well everywhere
everywhere on the whole planet yeah and
where how are you supposed to navigate
that how are you supposed to get through
life and concentrate on things that are
truly meaningful for you in the present
moment without being completely detached
yet from the outside world it's this
balance that people try to find that is
so elusive it's so hard to figure out
how much to watch I'm
much of this political process do I pay
attention to well that's the big
technological challenge yes you know I
mean we thought when I was a kid we
thought oh my god you know kids are
sitting in front of the television for
hours a night it's like well you ain't
seen nothing yet right you know now all
day long no kidding phones yeah all day
long yeah and the phones are so much
more powerful than television that
they're well it's like a typewriter
compared to a computer yes no and yeah
it's well and it's it's it's so so we
don't know how to adjust to that
psychologically but it's even worse than
that because as soon as you adjust to
the degree that you do the technology
changes on you right somes more mercy
sure it's always leading in that
direction yeah yeah so it's a real I
mean you know I see this especially with
parents who have teenage kids it's like
they know the phones aren't you know
I've been talking to some teenagers
lately about about you know maybe these
are kids that are getting bullied on
social media it's like I think well when
I was 14 you know it's kind of a rough
time of life and you go to school and
you've got your friends and you've got
your enemies and then you come home and
your friends aren't there and neither
are your enemies right right you're
you're outside there's an outside of
that yeah but now on social media
there's no outside you know and the one
kid I was talking to had moved schools
and it's doing quite well in the new one
but the people from the person's old
school are still after them on social
media
hmm so you know and you think well just
don't use your phone it's like yeah yeah
you tell that to your teenager you try
not using your phone for a whole day
yeah you think well the teenager is
gonna be able to manage the phone it's
like no they're not you can't manage the
phone
nobody can manage the phone it's not
just teenagers my middle daughter is 10
years old
and all of our friends have phone yeah
all of yep there's like two of her
friends that don't have phones yeah and
they come over the house and we have a
rule at our house you can't use a phone
like once you get inside the house
there's no phones you know friends come
over the house they want to like
constantly be on their phone and and we
still like you can't do that yeah and
they look you like what are you talking
about yeah this is my life yeah my life
is my phone they want to make Twitter
posts and Instagram and they want to do
Facebook and then yeah they want to
snapchat with each other with but
years on and then these kids are just
doing this all day long and they are
mastering the technology that's the
other thing it's not surprising that
they're trying to adapt to it but but
it's happening at a really early age
yeah because if you're giving your kid a
phone you're not putting any parental
filters on it you're allowing that kid
to have full access to Google and the
World Wide Web and they're just gonna if
you give your kid two phone and you
don't think they'll know how to use the
phone better than you within a year
you're a fool they're gonna they're
gonna have that thing figured out in
ways that you haven't even imagined so
yeah no you're not controlling it that's
for sure
it's a it is a very extraordinarily
unprecedented time to sort of navigate
this world and I don't think any does
not have been a I mean civilizations
have a deal with worse things right yeah
violence yeah yeah
disease but I don't think anyone's had
to deal with such a like a radically
transformative medium yeah like we have
this range of possibilities well and you
ain't seen nothing yet
right I mean this is just getting going
well have you been watching the Boston
Dynamics videos yeah oh my god in here
oh yeah a bit I mean the amount of
progress they've made in five years it's
just absolutely staggering I bet they
smell like sulfur and they don't even
know well Elan musk was on the podcast
talking about some new development their
work on called neural link and that this
is some radical new way of accentuating
bandwidth between human beings and
information and yes increasing the
access to it and he was very vague about
it yeah he said it was gonna come out
within you know X amount of months yeah
well they've already you know there are
scientists who've already managed direct
brain to computer links right you can
get monkeys for example to move a
robotic arm mm-hmm and so and I suspect
that you know you're you can you can
learn to control single neurons in your
face my suspicions are that we'll be
able to develop technologies that'll be
wearable that won't have to be neural
implants that you'll be able to
communicate with neroli and that's not
very far down the road and the you know
the the probability that were
going to build you know you know about
what's-his-name Kurtz walls idea the
singularity it is well it's a wild idea
and it seems somewhat improbable and I
had a friend who once told me that if
something is impossible then it won't
happen you know there'll be something
that will come up to stop it that you
won't expect and maybe the singularity
is one of those things but you know I
know a lot of guys who are in the
high-end computational world and a lot
of them are convinced that we're within
a decade of a machine that's as powerful
as a human brain and I know people have
been saying that for a long time but
Jesus you know computers are getting
good at emotion recognition they're
getting really good at facial
recognition they can communicate with
one another they can imitate those
Boston dynamic robots are pretty damn
impressive and they're mostly autonomous
we've got all sorts of things that can
navigate on the road like these
autonomous cars like all these things
are they're coming together real fast as
you ever watched black bear on Netflix
the only one I watched was the one that
outlined what the Chinese are now doing
to their own people
oh yeah the CRISPR one yeah yeah no no
the one where everything you do is rated
wrong right the social network one right
right right
yes which which is quite frightening and
reasonably probable Oh 100% probable I
was talking about the one I think it's
called heavy metal it's about autonomous
robots that seek out people and kill
them and you know these artificial
intelligence people that are making
these Boston dynamic robots and you know
the scariest one that I read about was a
DARPA one called the eater robot EA TR
it operates on it uses as a fuel it uses
biological material as fuel which means
if you're kidding you're kidding
normally EA C R so this is going to be
able to eat dead bodies in the field
theoretically and use it as fuel oh good
oh good oh good that sounds like a fine
thing to develop fucking imagine an army
of robotic armed artificially
intelligent things corpse eaters eat
corpses in order to have fuel to
while someone's obviously imagining that
it's made hmm this is a real thing yeah
well I mean part of the reason that I'm
doing what I'm doing with regards to
these lectures is you know I think that
we're in a time of unparalleled
possibility yeah so for good and for and
for evil and that the more people that
there are out there who have their acts
together the better the probability that
we're going to be able to manage it
because we've all got some pretty hard
decisions to make coming up real fast
you know in these guys that are working
on these AI systems I'm hoping that the
ones that are more ethically oriented in
a proper direction will be the ones that
have the operand I'm really hoping that
so yeah collectively and what's the
matter I was looking into it because
this and that came up before that it
breaks the Geneva Conventions if they
actually eat dead bodies you can't do
that yeah whatever
it's robot war dude that David
inventions out the window yeah no I I I
couldn't agree with you more and I think
personally this is important and
collectively it's very important that I
mean I just think it's I think what you
wrote 12 rules to life we need rules we
need rules to be able to figure out how
to navigate everything that's working
well that's why I think that the
individual level of analysis is the
right one is that I'm hoping that you
know that like every time someone comes
up and talks to me and says look you
know I was in a dark place and I got my
life together and this is how it's going
I think that tilts the scales
non-trivial e towards a good outcome yes
and the more people that that's
happening to the better and I don't
think there's a more effective way of
doing it than to concentrate on the
individual no I don't think there is
either and it's happening a lot you know
I I hear it every day I hear it every
day people that find you and find a lot
of other inspirational people online and
just Jaco and there's so many of ya
there's so many and there's so much fuel
now for inspiration yeah pretty fun that
that inspiration could become popular
yeah it's crazy hmm you saw this come no
kidding no kidding and encouragement and
one of the things that's quite sad is
how little encouragement people need and
it's so touching you know because I'm
constantly in a state of like being
overwhelmed well even with what happened
this more
when I went to Whole Foods you know
because it's overwhelming to have people
come up and like they share these really
intimate pieces of their life with you
in 20 seconds you know it's like like
you're an old friend you know and like
says here's what my life was like it's
dark you know it's dark and here's a
bunch of good things that are happening
it's like this little blast of it's like
the the persona of the person disappears
and you get to see the real person
there's twenty seconds it's like it's
it's really it's overwhelming but every
time that happens as far as I'm
concerned it's a victory and yeah that's
a victory that multiplies to as far as
I'm concerned so I'm hoping that well
every little bit helps you know that's
it certainly does and by the way if you
meet me and you have one of those
stories and I don't know how to react
that's just how it is you know I go wow
that's amazing
yeah well that's that's good man that's
who perhaps genuinely happy for you but
I still don't know how to react that's
how to react
I don't ever we'll learn that's how to
react it's okay that's how to react
that's all you need it's like that's
great man I hope you keep doing it
that's all I power to it no it feels
flat you know I mean like what they said
is so mind-blowing and I'm saying
terrific yeah but it is terrific it is
terrific yes absolutely we just did
another three hours it's gone thank you
sir always bless good to see you Joel
Pearson you're good man it's a pleasure
to be here buddy bye thanks very much
[Music]
[Applause]